---
layout: media
title: "Publication List"
categories: publications
excerpt: "Journal articles associated with the TIGR Lab."
ads: false
share: false
image:
  feature: projects.dti-aging.large.jpg
  teaser: projects.dti-aging.small.jpg
---

Please visit [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=voineskos+a) for list of our publications. Updated on 26th Feb, 2016.

1. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2016 Jan 29. doi: 10.1038/npp.2016.14. [Epub ahead of
print]

Prefrontal White Matter Structure Mediates the Influence of GAD1 on Working
Memory.

Lett TA(1,)(2), Kennedy JL(2,)(3,)(4), Radhu N(2,)(4), Dominguez LG(2),
Chakravarty MM(5,)(6), Nazeri A(2,)(3), Farzan F(2,)(4), Walter H(1), Heinz A(1),
Mulsant BH(2,)(3,)(4), Daskalakis ZJ(2,)(3,)(4), Voineskos AN(2,)(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Charité Universitätsmedizin,
Berlin, Germany. (2)Campbell Family Mental Health Institute, Centre for Addiction
and Mental Health, Toronto, ON, Canada. (3)Department of Psychiatry, University
of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. (4)Institute of Medical Science, University of
Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. (5)Cerebral Imaging Centre, Douglas Hospital Mental
Health University Institute, Verdun, QC, Canada. (6)Departments of Psychiatry and
Biomedical Engineering, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada.

The glutamic acid decarboxylase 1 (GAD1) gene is a major determinant of
γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA), the most abundant inhibitory neurotransmitter
modulating local neuronal circuitry. GABAergic dysfunction and expression of GAD1
have been implicated in the pathophysiology of schizophrenia, and in working
memory impairment. We examined the influence of the functional GAD1 rs3749034
variant on white matter fractional anisotropy (FA), cortical thickness, and
working memory performance in schizophrenia patients and healthy controls
(N=197). Using transcranial magnetic stimulation with electroencephalography
(TMS-EEG), we subsequently examined the effect of rs3749034 on long-interval
cortical inhibition (LICI) in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) in
schizophrenia patients and healthy controls (N=66). We found that the rs3749034
T-allele carrier risk group had lower voxel-wise FA in the prefrontal cortex
region (PFWE-corrected<0.05) but not cortical thickness. Mixed-model regression
revealed a significant effect on attentional processing and working memory across
four performance measures (F1,182=11.5, P=8 × 10(-4)). FA in the prefrontal
cortex was associated with digit-span performance. Voxel-wise mediation analysis 
revealed that the effect GAD1 on poorer digit-span performance statistically
predicted the lower white matter FA (PFWE-corrected<0.05). In exploratory
analysis, we found a prominent GAD1 genotype-by-diagnosis interaction on DLPFC
LICI (F1,56=14.3, P=4.1 × 10(-4)). Our findings converge on variation in GAD1
gene predicting a susceptibility mechanism that affects white matter FA,
GABAergic inhibitory neurotransmission in the DLPFC, and working memory
performance. Furthermore, via voxel mediation of FA and TMS-EEG intervention, we 
provide evidence for a potentially causal mechanism through which aberrant DLPFC 
GABA signaling may contribute to working memory
dysfunction.Neuropsychopharmacology advance online publication, 24 February 2016;
doi:10.1038/npp.2016.14.

PMID: 26822489  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2016 Jan 25. doi: 10.1002/gps.4423. [Epub ahead of
print]

Amyloid deposition in semantic dementia: a positron emission tomography study.

Brown EE(1), Graff-Guerrero A(1,)(2), Houle S(1,)(2), Mizrahi R(1,)(2), Wilson
AA(1,)(2), Pollock BG(1,)(2), Mulsant BH(1,)(2), Felsky D(1), Voineskos
AN(1,)(2), Tang-Wai DF(3), Verhoeff NP(1,)(4), Freedman M(4,)(5,)(6,)(7), Ismail 
Z(1,)(2,)(8), Chow TW(1,)(2,)(4,)(5,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Campbell Family Mental Health Research
Institute, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (3)University Health Network, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada. (4)Baycrest Health Sciences, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (5)Rotman
Research Institute, Baycrest Health Sciences, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(6)Division of Neurology, Department of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada. (7)Department of Medicine, Division of Neurology, Mt. Sinai
Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (8)Departments of Psychiatry and Neurology,
Hotchkiss Brain Institute, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Pittsburgh compound B ([11C]-PIB) identifies amyloid-β (Aβ)
deposition in vivo. Asymptomatic Aβ deposition has been reported consistently in 
some healthy older subjects. Of patients with frontotemporal dementia, those who 
have later onset have a higher potential for Aβ deposition.
OBJECTIVE: Comparison of Aβ deposition in Alzheimer's disease (AD), healthy older
controls, and patients with early- and late-onset semantic dementia (SD), a
subtype of frontotemporal dementia.
METHODS: Subjects were recruited from tertiary academic care centers specializing
in assessment and management of patients with neurodegenerative disease. We used 
the radiotracer [11C]-PIB in a high-resolution positron emission tomography
scanner to evaluate 11 participants with SD (six with onset before age 65 and
five with later onset), 9 with probable AD, and 10 controls over age 60. The main
outcome measures were frontal, temporal, parietal, and total [11C]-PIB
standardized uptake value ratios to establish PIB-positive (PIB+) cutoff.
RESULTS: The five patients with late-onset SD were PIB-negative. Two of six with 
early-onset SD, seven of nine with AD, and 1 of 10 controls were PIB+. The SD
participants who were PIB+ did not have memory or visuospatial deficits that are 
typical in AD.
CONCLUSIONS: Aβ deposition does not seem to be associated with late-onset SD.
Future larger studies might confirm whether a significant minority of early-onset
SD patients exhibit Aβ deposition. Copyright © 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Copyright © 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 26807731  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2016 Jan 13. pii: 0271678X15626719. [Epub ahead of
print]

Cerebrovascular and microglial states are not altered by functional
neuroinflammatory gene variant.

Felsky D(1), De Jager PL(2), Schneider JA(3), Arfanakis K(4), Fleischman DA(5),
Arvanitakis Z(6), Honer WG(7), Pouget JG(1), Mizrahi R(1), Pollock BG(1), Kennedy
JL(1), Bennett DA(6), Voineskos AN(8); authors of the Alzheimer’s Disease
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information: 
(1)Campbell Family Mental Health Institute, Centre for Addiction and Mental
Health, Department of Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada
Institute of Medical Science, University of Toronto, King's College Circle,
Toronto, ON, Canada. (2)Program in Translational NeuroPsychiatric Genomics,
Department of Neurology, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA, USA Program in Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute,
Cambridge, MA, USA. (3)Rush Alzheimer's Disease Center, Rush University Medical
Center, Chicago, IL, USA. (4)Rush Alzheimer's Disease Center, Rush University
Medical Center, Chicago, IL, USA Department of Biomedical Engineering, Illinois
Institute of Technology, IL, USA. (5)Rush Alzheimer's Disease Center, Rush
University Medical Center, Chicago, IL, USA Department of Neurological Sciences, 
Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, IL, USA Department of Behavioral
Sciences, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, IL, USA. (6)Rush Alzheimer's
Disease Center, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, IL, USA Department of
Neurological Sciences, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, IL, USA. (7)BC
Mental Health and Addictions Research Institute, University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, BC, Canada. (8)Campbell Family Mental Health Institute, Centre for
Addiction and Mental Health, Department of Psychiatry, University of Toronto,
Toronto, ON, Canada Institute of Medical Science, University of Toronto, King's
College Circle, Toronto, ON, Canada aristotle.voineskos@camh.ca.

The translocator protein, a microglial-expressed marker of neuroinflammation, has
been implicated in Alzheimer's disease, which is characterized by alterations in 
vascular and inflammatory states. A TSPO variant, rs6971, determines binding
affinity of exogenous radioligands in vivo; however, the effect of these altered 
binding characteristics on inflammatory and cerebrovascular biomarkers has not
been assessed. In 2345 living subjects (Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging
Initiative, n = 1330) and postmortem brain samples (Religious Orders Study and
Memory and Aging Project, n = 1015), we analyzed effects of rs6971 on white
matter hyperintensisites, cerebral infarcts, circulating inflammatory biomarkers,
amyloid angiopathy, and microglial activation. We found that rs6971 does not
alter translocator protein in a way that impacts cerebrovascular and inflammatory
states known to be affected in dementia.

© The Author(s) 2016.

PMID: 26762507  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Neurology. 2016 Feb 2;86(5):410-7. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000002326. Epub 2016
Jan 6.

Channelopathy-related SCN10A gene variants predict cerebellar dysfunction in
multiple sclerosis.

Roostaei T(1), Sadaghiani S(1), Park MT(1), Mashhadi R(1), Nazeri A(1), Noshad
S(1), Salehi MJ(1), Naghibzadeh M(1), Moghadasi AN(1), Owji M(1), Doosti R(1),
Taheri AP(1), Rad AS(1), Azimi A(1), Chakravarty MM(1), Voineskos AN(1), Nazeri
A(2), Sahraian MA(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the MS Research Center, Neuroscience Institute (T.R., S.S., Aria Nazeri, 
S.N., M.N., A.N.M., M.O., R.D., A.A., Arash Nazeri, M.A.S.), Interdisciplinary
Neuroscience Research Program (T.R., S.S., M.N., Arash Nazeri), Urology Research 
Center (R.M.), Department of Neurology (A.N.M., M.A.S.), and Department of
Radiology (A.P.H.T., A.S.R.), Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Iran; Kimel 
Family Translational Imaging-Genetics Laboratory (T.R., A.N.V., Arash Nazeri),
Research Imaging Centre, Campbell Family Mental Health Institute, Centre for
Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto; Department of Psychiatry (T.R., A.N.V.,
Arash Nazeri), University of Toronto; Cerebral Imaging Centre (M.T.M.P., M.M.C.),
Douglas Mental Health Institute, Verdun; Schulich School of Medicine and
Dentistry (M.T.M.P.), Western University, London, Canada; Department of
Electrical Engineering (M.J.S.), Sharif University of Technology, Tehran, Iran;
Department of Neurology (A.A.), Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA;
and Departments of Psychiatry and Biomedical Engineering (M.M.C.), McGill
University, Montreal, Canada. (2)From the MS Research Center, Neuroscience
Institute (T.R., S.S., Aria Nazeri, S.N., M.N., A.N.M., M.O., R.D., A.A., Arash
Nazeri, M.A.S.), Interdisciplinary Neuroscience Research Program (T.R., S.S.,
M.N., Arash Nazeri), Urology Research Center (R.M.), Department of Neurology
(A.N.M., M.A.S.), and Department of Radiology (A.P.H.T., A.S.R.), Tehran
University of Medical Sciences, Iran; Kimel Family Translational Imaging-Genetics
Laboratory (T.R., A.N.V., Arash Nazeri), Research Imaging Centre, Campbell Family
Mental Health Institute, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto;
Department of Psychiatry (T.R., A.N.V., Arash Nazeri), University of Toronto;
Cerebral Imaging Centre (M.T.M.P., M.M.C.), Douglas Mental Health Institute,
Verdun; Schulich School of Medicine and Dentistry (M.T.M.P.), Western University,
London, Canada; Department of Electrical Engineering (M.J.S.), Sharif University 
of Technology, Tehran, Iran; Department of Neurology (A.A.), Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, PA; and Departments of Psychiatry and Biomedical
Engineering (M.M.C.), McGill University, Montreal, Canada. msahrai@tums.ac.ir
arashnazeri@gmail.com.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the motor-behavioral and neural correlates of putative
functional common variants in the sodium-channel NaV1.8 encoding gene (SCN10A) in
vivo in patients with multiple sclerosis (MS).
METHODS: We recruited 161 patients with relapsing-onset MS and 94 demographically
comparable healthy participants. All patients with MS underwent structural MRI
and clinical examinations (Expanded Disability Status Scale [EDSS] and Multiple
Sclerosis Functional Composite [MSFC]). Whole-brain voxel-wise and cerebellar
volumetry were performed to assess differences in regional brain volumes between 
genotype groups. Resting-state fMRI was acquired from 62 patients with MS to
evaluate differences in cerebellar functional connectivity. All participants were
genotyped for 4 potentially functional SCN10A polymorphisms.
RESULTS: Two SCN10A polymorphisms in high linkage disequilibrium (r(2) = 0.95)
showed significant association with MSFC performance in patients with MS
(rs6795970: p = 6.2 × 10(-4); rs6801957: p = 0.0025). Patients with MS with
rs6795970(AA) genotype performed significantly worse than rs6795970(G) carriers
in MSFC (p = 1.8 × 10(-4)) and all of its subscores. This association was
independent of EDSS and cerebellar atrophy. Although the genotype groups showed
no difference in regional brain volumes, rs6795970(AA) carriers demonstrated
significantly diminished cerebellar functional connectivity with the thalami and 
midbrain. No significant SCN10A-genotype effect was observed on MSFC performance 
in healthy participants.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that SCN10A variation substantially influences
functional status, including prominent effects on motor coordination in patients 
with MS. These findings were supported by the effects of this variant on a neural
system important for motor coordination, namely cerebello-thalamic circuitry.
Overall, our findings add to the emerging evidence that suggests that sodium
channel NaV1.8 could serve as a target for future drug-based interventions to
treat cerebellar dysfunction in MS.

© 2016 American Academy of Neurology.

PMID: 26740675  [PubMed - in process]


5. Schizophr Res. 2016 Feb;170(2-3):330-5. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2015.12.009. Epub
2015 Dec 24.

The influence of medical burden severity and cognition on functional competence
in older community-dwelling individuals with schizophrenia.

Tsoutsoulas C(1), Mulsant BH(1), Kalache SM(1), Kumar S(1), Ghazala Z(1),
Voineskos AN(1), Butters MA(2), Menon M(1), Rajji TK(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Geriatric Psychiatry, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health,
Toronto, Canada; Department of Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Toronto,
Canada. (2)Department of Psychiatry, University of Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(3)Division of Geriatric Psychiatry, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health,
Toronto, Canada; Department of Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Toronto,
Canada. Electronic address: Tarek.Rajji@camh.ca.

OBJECTIVE: Cognition predicts functional competence among individuals with
schizophrenia across the lifespan. However, as these individuals age, increasing 
levels of medical burden may also contribute to functional deficits both directly
and indirectly through cognition. Thus, we assessed the relationship among,
cognition, medical burden, and functional competence in older individuals with
schizophrenia.
METHODS: We analyzed data obtained from 60 community-dwelling participants with
schizophrenia and 30 control participants aged 50 or above. Cognition was
assessed using the MATRICS Consensus Cognitive Battery (MCCB), functional
competence was assessed using the USCD Performance-Based Skills Assessment
(UPSA), and medical burden was assessed using the Cumulative Illness Rating Scale
for Geriatrics (CIRS-G). Group differences were assessed using independent
samples t-tests or chi-square tests. Mediation analyses using bootstrapping
techniques were used to assess whether cognition mediated the effects of medical 
burden on functional competence.
RESULTS: Participants with schizophrenia had higher levels of medical burden,
cognitive deficits, and functional impairments. In participants with
schizophrenia, cognition, but not medical burden, predicted functional competence
after adjusting for age, education, gender, clinical symptoms, and
anticholinergic burden of medications. In control participants, cognition and
medical burden both predicted functional competence after adjusting for age,
education, and gender. Further, cognition was found to fully mediate the
association between medical burden and functional competence in control
participants.
CONCLUSION: Cognition is a robust predictor of functional competence among older 
individuals with schizophrenia, regardless of medical burden. Cognitive deficits 
associated with schizophrenia may mask any further cognitive impairment
associated with medical burden and its impact on function.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26724896  [PubMed - in process]


6. Schizophr Bull. 2015 Dec 27. pii: sbv180. [Epub ahead of print]

Limited Evidence for Association of Genome-Wide Schizophrenia Risk Variants on
Cortical Neuroimaging Phenotypes.

Voineskos AN(1), Felsky D(2), Wheeler AL(3), Rotenberg DJ(4), Levesque M(4),
Patel S(3), Szeszko PR(5), Kennedy JL(3), Lencz T(5), Malhotra AK(5).

Author information: 
(1)Campbell Family Mental Health Institute, Centre for Addiction and Mental
Health, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Department of Psychiatry, University of
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; These authors contributed equally to the
article. Aristotle.Voineskos@camh.ca. (2)Campbell Family Mental Health Institute,
Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Department of
Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; These authors
contributed equally to the article. (3)Campbell Family Mental Health Institute,
Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Department of
Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; (4)Campbell Family
Mental Health Institute, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada; (5)Zucker Hillside Hospital, Glen Oaks, NY; Center for
Psychiatric Neuroscience, Feinstein Institute, Manhasset, NY.

BACKGROUND: There are now over 100 established genetic risk variants for
schizophrenia; however, their influence on brain structure and circuitry across
the human lifespan are not known.
METHODS: We examined healthy individuals 8-86 years of age, from the Centre for
Addiction and Mental Health, the Zucker Hillside Hospital, and the Philadelphia
Neurodevelopmental Cohort. Following thorough quality control procedures, we
investigated associations of established genetic risk variants with heritable
neuroimaging phenotypes relevant to schizophrenia, namely thickness of frontal
and temporal cortical regions (n = 565) and frontotemporal and interhemispheric
white matter tract fractional anisotropy (FA) (n = 530).
RESULTS: There was little evidence for association of risk variants with imaging 
phenotypes. No association with cortical thickness of any region was present.
Only rs12148337, near a long noncoding RNA region, was associated with white
matter FA (splenium of corpus callosum) following multiple comparison correction 
(corrected p = .012); this single nucleotide polymorphism was also associated
with genu FA and superior longitudinal fasciculus FA at p <.005 (uncorrected).
There was no association of polygenic risk score with white matter FA or cortical
thickness.
CONCLUSIONS: In sum, our findings provide limited evidence for association of
schizophrenia risk variants with cortical thickness or diffusion imaging white
matter phenotypes. When taken with recent lack of association of these variants
with subcortical brain volumes, our results either suggest that structural
neuroimaging approaches at current resolution are not sufficiently sensitive to
detect effects of these risk variants or that multiple comparison correction in
correlated phenotypes is too stringent, potentially "eliminating" biologically
important signals.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Maryland
Psychiatric Research Center. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26712857  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


7. Schizophr Res. 2015 Dec;169(1-3):69-75. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2015.10.023. Epub
2015 Oct 24.

Neuroimaging predictors of functional outcomes in schizophrenia at baseline and
6-month follow-up.

Behdinan T(1), Foussias G(2), Wheeler AL(3), Stefanik L(3), Felsky D(1),
Remington G(2), Rajji TK(2), Mallar Chakravarty M(4), Voineskos AN(5).

Author information: 
(1)Kimel Family Translational Imaging-Genetics Research Lab, Research Imaging
Centre, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, 250 College Street, Toronto, ON
M5T 1R8, Canada; Institute of Medical Science, University of Toronto, 27 King's
College Circle, Toronto, ON M5S, Canada. (2)Institute of Medical Science,
University of Toronto, 27 King's College Circle, Toronto, ON M5S, Canada;
Campbell Family Mental Health Institute, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, 
250 College Street, Toronto, ON M5T 1R8, Canada; Department of Psychiatry,
University of Toronto, 27 King's College Circle, Toronto, ON, M5S, Canada.
(3)Kimel Family Translational Imaging-Genetics Research Lab, Research Imaging
Centre, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, 250 College Street, Toronto, ON
M5T 1R8, Canada. (4)Cerebral Imaging Centre, Douglas Mental Health University
Institute, Verdun, QC, Canada; Department of Psychiatry, McGill University,
Montreal, QC, Canada. (5)Kimel Family Translational Imaging-Genetics Research
Lab, Research Imaging Centre, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, 250 College
Street, Toronto, ON M5T 1R8, Canada; Institute of Medical Science, University of 
Toronto, 27 King's College Circle, Toronto, ON M5S, Canada; Campbell Family
Mental Health Institute, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, 250 College
Street, Toronto, ON M5T 1R8, Canada; Department of Psychiatry, University of
Toronto, 27 King's College Circle, Toronto, ON, M5S, Canada. Electronic address: 
Aristotle.Voineskos@camh.ca.

PURPOSE: Studies show that deficit syndrome schizophrenia patients, characterized
by primary negative symptoms and poor functional outcome, have impairment in
specific neural circuits. We assessed whether these same neural circuits are
directly linked to functional outcomes across schizophrenia patients.
METHODS: T1- and diffusion-weighted MR images were obtained for schizophrenia
(n=30) and matched healthy control participants (n=30). Negative symptoms and
functional outcome were assessed at baseline and 6-month follow-up. Cortical
thickness and tract-wise fractional anisotropy (FA) were compared between groups.
To assess relationships of neuroimaging measures with functional outcome,
principal component analysis (PCA) was performed on tract-wise FA values and
components were entered into a multiple regression model for schizophrenia
participants.
RESULTS: Consistent with the literature, schizophrenia participants showed
frontotemporal reductions in cortical thickness and tract-wise FA compared to
controls. The top two components from PCA explained 71% of the variance in
tract-wise FA values. The second component (associated with inferior longitudinal
and arcuate fasciculus FA) was significantly correlated with functional outcome
(baseline: β=0.54, p=0.03; follow-up: β=0.74, p=0.047); further analysis revealed
this effect was mediated by negative symptoms. Post-hoc network analysis revealed
increased cortical coupling between right inferior frontal and supramarginal gyri
(connected by the arcuate fasciculus) in schizophrenia participants with poorer
functional outcome.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings indicate that impairment in the same neural circuitry
susceptible in deficit syndrome schizophrenia predicts functional outcome in a
continuous manner in schizophrenia participants. This relationship was mediated
by negative symptom burden. Our findings provide novel evidence for brain-based
biomarkers of longitudinal functional outcome in people with schizophrenia.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4681643 [Available on 2016-12-01]
PMID: 26603060  [PubMed - in process]


8. J Vis Exp. 2015 Nov 10;(105):e51861. doi: 10.3791/51861.

High-resolution In Vivo Manual Segmentation Protocol for Human Hippocampal
Subfields Using 3T Magnetic Resonance Imaging.

Winterburn J(1), Pruessner JC(2), Sofia C(3), Schira MM(4), Lobaugh NJ(5),
Voineskos AN(6), Chakravarty MM(7).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomaterials and Biomedical Engineering, University of Toronto;
Computational Brain Anatomy Laboratory, Douglas Institute, McGill University;
winterburn.julie@gmail.com. (2)McGill Centre for Studies in Aging, McGill
University. (3)MRI Unit, Research Imaging Centre, Campbell Family Mental Health
Research Institute, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health; Department of
Psychiatry, University of Toronto. (4)School of Psychology, University of
Wollongong; Neuroscience Research Australia. (5)MRI Unit, Research Imaging
Centre, Campbell Family Mental Health Research Institute, Centre for Addiction
and Mental Health; Department of Medicine, University of Toronto. (6)Department
of Psychiatry, University of Toronto; Kimel Family Translational Imaging Genetics
Research Laboratory, Research Imaging Centre, Campbell Family Mental Health
Research Institute, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health. (7)Institute of
Biomaterials and Biomedical Engineering, University of Toronto; Computational
Brain Anatomy Laboratory, Douglas Institute, McGill University.

The human hippocampus has been broadly studied in the context of memory and
normal brain function and its role in different neuropsychiatric disorders has
been heavily studied. While many imaging studies treat the hippocampus as a
single unitary neuroanatomical structure, it is, in fact, composed of several
subfields that have a complex three-dimensional geometry. As such, it is known
that these subfields perform specialized functions and are differentially
affected through the course of different disease states. Magnetic resonance (MR) 
imaging can be used as a powerful tool to interrogate the morphology of the
hippocampus and its subfields. Many groups use advanced imaging software and
hardware (>3T) to image the subfields; however this type of technology may not be
readily available in most research and clinical imaging centers. To address this 
need, this manuscript provides a detailed step-by-step protocol for segmenting
the full anterior-posterior length of the hippocampus and its subfields: cornu
ammonis (CA) 1, CA2/CA3, CA4/dentate gyrus (DG), strata
radiatum/lacunosum/moleculare (SR/SL/SM), and subiculum. This protocol has been
applied to five subjects (3F, 2M; age 29-57, avg. 37). Protocol reliability is
assessed by resegmenting either the right or left hippocampus of each subject and
computing the overlap using the Dice's kappa metric. Mean Dice's kappa (range)
across the five subjects are: whole hippocampus, 0.91 (0.90-0.92); CA1, 0.78
(0.77-0.79); CA2/CA3, 0.64 (0.56-0.73); CA4/dentate gyrus, 0.83 (0.81-0.85);
strata radiatum/lacunosum/moleculare, 0.71 (0.68-0.73); and subiculum 0.75
(0.72-0.78). The segmentation protocol presented here provides other laboratories
with a reliable method to study the hippocampus and hippocampal subfields in vivo
using commonly available MR tools.

PMID: 26575133  [PubMed - in process]


9. Ann Neurol. 2015 Nov;78(5):731-41. doi: 10.1002/ana.24504. Epub 2015 Aug 29.

Genome-wide variant by serum urate interaction in Parkinson's disease.

Nazeri A(1,)(2), Roostaei T(1,)(2), Sadaghiani S(1), Chakravarty MM(3,)(4),
Eberly S(5), Lang AE(6,)(7), Voineskos AN(1,)(2,)(8,)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Kimel Family Translational Imaging-Genetics Laboratory, Research Imaging
Centre, Campbell Family Mental Health Institute, Centre for Addiction and Mental 
Health, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (2)Department of Psychiatry, University of
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (3)Cerebral Imaging Centre, Douglas Institute,
Montreal, Quebec, Canada. (4)Departments of Psychiatry and Biomedical
Engineering, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. (5)Department of
Biostatistics and Computational Biology, University of Rochester Medical Center, 
Rochester, NY. (6)Morton and Gloria Shulman Movement Disorders Clinic and Edmond 
J. Safra Program in Parkinson's Disease, Toronto Western Hospital, University
Health Network, Division of Neurology, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (7)Division of
Neurology, Department of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada. (8)Institute of Medical Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada. (9)Underserved Populations Program, Centre for Addiction and Mental
Health, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

OBJECTIVE: Serum urate levels have been associated with risk for and progression 
of Parkinson's disease (PD). Urate-related compounds are therapeutic candidates
in neuroprotective efforts to slow PD progression. A urate-elevating agent is
currently under investigation as a potential disease-modifying strategy in people
with PD. However, PD is a heterogeneous disorder, and genetic variation may
explain divergence in disease severity and progression.
METHODS: We conducted a genome-wide association study to identify gene variant × 
serum urate interaction effects on the striatal (123) I-ioflupane (DaTscan)
binding ratio measured using single photon emission computed tomography in
patients with possible PD from the Parkinson's Progression Markers Initiative
(PPMI, n = 360). Follow-up analyses were conducted to assess gene variant × serum
urate interaction effects on magnetic resonance imaging-derived regional brain
volumes and clinical status. We then attempted to replicate our primary analysis 
in patients who entered the Parkinson Research Examination of CEP-1347 Trial
(PRECEPT) with a clinical diagnosis of PD (n = 349).
RESULTS: Rs1109303 (T>G) variant within the INPP5K gene on chromosome 17p13.3
demonstrated a genome-wide significant interaction with serum urate level to
predict striatal dopamine transporter density among all PPMI participants (n =
359) with possible PD (p = 2.01 × 10(-8) ; after excluding participants with
SWEDD [scan without evidence of dopaminergic deficit]: p = 1.12 × 10(-9) ; n =
316). Independent of striatal dopamine transporter density, similar effects on
brain atrophy, bradykinesia, anxiety, and depression were observed. No effect was
present in the PRECEPT sample at baseline; however, in non-SWEDD PD participants 
in PRECEPT (n = 309), we observed a significant longitudinal genotype × serum
urate interaction effect, consistent in direction with the PPMI sample, on
progression of striatal dopamine transporter density over the 22-month follow-up.
INTERPRETATION: Genetic profile combined with serum urate level can be used to
predict disease severity and potential disease progression in patients with PD.
These results may be relevant to therapeutic efforts targeting the urate pathway.

© 2015 American Neurological Association.

PMID: 26284320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Hum Brain Mapp. 2015 Aug;36(8):3020-37. doi: 10.1002/hbm.22825. Epub 2015 May 9.

Hippocampal (subfield) volume and shape in relation to cognitive performance
across the adult lifespan.

Voineskos AN(1,)(2,)(3), Winterburn JL(1,)(4,)(5), Felsky D(1,)(3), Pipitone
J(1), Rajji TK(2,)(3), Mulsant BH(2,)(3), Chakravarty MM(4,)(5,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Kimel Family Translational Imaging Genetics Laboratory, Research Imaging
Centre, Campbell Family Mental Health Institute, Centre for Addiction and Mental 
Health, Toronto, ON, Canada. (2)Geriatric Mental Health Service, Campbell Family 
Mental Health Institute, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, ON,
Canada. (3)Department of Psychiatry and Institute of Medical Science, University 
of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. (4)Institute of Biomaterials and Biomedical
Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. (5)Computational Brain
Anatomy Laboratory, Cerebral Imaging Centre, Douglas Mental Health University
Institute, Montreal, QC, Canada. (6)Departments of Psychiatry and Biomedical
Engineering, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada.

Newer approaches to characterizing hippocampal morphology can provide novel
insights regarding cognitive function across the lifespan. We comprehensively
assessed the relationships among age, hippocampal morphology, and
hippocampal-dependent cognitive function in 137 healthy individuals across the
adult lifespan (18-86 years of age). They underwent MRI, cognitive assessments
and genotyping for Apolipoprotein E status. We measured hippocampal subfield
volumes using a new multiatlas segmentation tool (MAGeT-Brain) and assessed
vertex-wise (inward and outward displacements) and global surface-based
descriptions of hippocampus morphology. We examined the effects of age on
hippocampal morphology, as well as the relationship among age, hippocampal
morphology, and episodic and working memory performance. Age and volume were
modestly correlated across hippocampal subfields. Significant patterns of inward 
and outward displacement in hippocampal head and tail were associated with age.
The first principal shape component of the left hippocampus, characterized by a
lengthening of the antero-posterior axis was prominently associated with working 
memory performance across the adult lifespan. In contrast, no significant
relationships were found among subfield volumes and cognitive performance. Our
findings demonstrate that hippocampal shape plays a unique and important role in 
hippocampal-dependent cognitive aging across the adult lifespan, meriting
consideration as a biomarker in strategies targeting the delay of cognitive
aging.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25959503  [PubMed - in process]


11. Neurobiol Aging. 2015 Jun;36(6):2094-106. doi:
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2015.02.022. Epub 2015 Feb 27.

Superficial white matter as a novel substrate of age-related cognitive decline.

Nazeri A(1), Chakravarty MM(2), Rajji TK(3), Felsky D(4), Rotenberg DJ(5), Mason 
M(6), Xu LN(6), Lobaugh NJ(7), Mulsant BH(3), Voineskos AN(8).

Author information: 
(1)Kimel Family Translational Imaging-Genetics Laboratory, Ontario, Canada;
Research Imaging Centre, Campbell Family Mental Health Institute, Centre for
Addiction and Mental Health, Ontario, Canada; Department of Psychiatry,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (2)Kimel Family Translational
Imaging-Genetics Laboratory, Ontario, Canada; Research Imaging Centre, Campbell
Family Mental Health Institute, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Ontario, 
Canada; Cerebral Imaging Centre, Douglas Institute, Verdun, Quebec, Canada;
Department of Psychiatry, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada; Department
Biomedical Engineering, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada;
Geriatric Mental Health Service, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Ontario,
Canada; Institute of Medical Science, University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(4)Kimel Family Translational Imaging-Genetics Laboratory, Ontario, Canada;
Research Imaging Centre, Campbell Family Mental Health Institute, Centre for
Addiction and Mental Health, Ontario, Canada; Institute of Medical Science,
University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (5)Kimel Family Translational
Imaging-Genetics Laboratory, Ontario, Canada; Research Imaging Centre, Campbell
Family Mental Health Institute, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Ontario, 
Canada. (6)Kimel Family Translational Imaging-Genetics Laboratory, Ontario,
Canada. (7)Research Imaging Centre, Campbell Family Mental Health Institute,
Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Ontario, Canada; Department of
Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Department of
Neurology, University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (8)Kimel Family Translational 
Imaging-Genetics Laboratory, Ontario, Canada; Research Imaging Centre, Campbell
Family Mental Health Institute, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Ontario, 
Canada; Department of Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada; Geriatric Mental Health Service, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, 
Ontario, Canada; Institute of Medical Science, University of Toronto, Ontario,
Canada. Electronic address: Aristotle.Voineskos@camh.ca.

Studies of diffusion tensor imaging have focused mainly on the role of deep white
matter tract microstructural abnormalities associated with aging and age-related 
cognitive decline. However, the potential role of superficial white matter (SWM) 
in aging and, by extension, cognitive-aging, is less clear. Healthy individuals
(n = 141; F/M: 66/75 years) across the adult lifespan (18-86 years) underwent
diffusion tensor imaging and a battery of cognitive testing. SWM was assessed via
a combination of probabilistic tractography and tract-based spatial statistics
(TBSS). A widespread inverse relationship of fractional anisotropy (FA) values in
SWM with age was observed. SWM-FA adjacent to the precentral gyri was associated 
with fine-motor-speed, whereas performance in visuomotor-attention/processing
speed correlated with SWM-FA in all 4 lobes of the left-hemisphere and in right
parieto-occipital SWM-FA (family-wise error corrected p < 0.05). Independent of
deep white matter-FA, right frontal and right occipital SWM-FA-mediated age
effects on motor-speed and visuomotor-attention/processing speed, respectively.
Altogether, our results indicate that SWM-FA contributes uniquely to age-related 
cognitive performance, and should be considered as a novel biomarker of
cognitive-aging.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25834938  [PubMed - in process]


12. JAMA Psychiatry. 2015 May;72(5):446-55. doi: 10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2014.3020.

Further neuroimaging evidence for the deficit subtype of schizophrenia: a
cortical connectomics analysis.

Wheeler AL(1), Wessa M(2), Szeszko PR(3), Foussias G(4), Chakravarty MM(5), Lerch
JP(6), DeRosse P(3), Remington G(4), Mulsant BH(7), Linke J(2), Malhotra AK(3),
Voineskos AN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Kimel Family Translational Imaging Genetics Laboratory, Research Imaging
Centre, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada2Schizophrenia Division of the Complex Mental Illness Program, Centre for
Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto. (2)Department of Clinical Psychology and
Neuropsychology, Psychological Institute, Johannes-Gutenberg University Mainz,
Mainz, Germany. (3)Center for Translational Psychiatry, The Feinstein Institute
for Medical Research, Manhasset, New York6Division of Psychiatry Research, The
Zucker Hillside Hospital, Division of the North Shore-Long Island Jewish Health
System, Glen Oaks, New York7Hofstra. (4)Schizophrenia Division of the Complex
Mental Illness Program, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada3Department of Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada8Institute of Medical Science, University of Toronto, T. (5)Kimel Family
Translational Imaging Genetics Laboratory, Research Imaging Centre, Centre for
Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, Ontario, Canada3Department of Psychiatry,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada10Institute of Biomaterials and
Biom. (6)Program in Neuroscience and Mental Health, Hospital for Sick Children,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada12Department of Medical Biophysics, University of
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (7)Kimel Family Translational Imaging Genetics
Laboratory, Research Imaging Centre, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada3Department of Psychiatry, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada9Campbell Family Research Institute.

IMPORTANCE: The clinical heterogeneity of schizophrenia has hindered
neurobiological investigations aimed at identifying neural correlates of the
disorder.
OBJECTIVE: To identify network-based biomarkers across the spectrum of impairment
present in schizophrenia by separately evaluating individuals with deficit and
nondeficit subtypes of this disorder.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: A university hospital network-based
neuroimaging study was conducted between February 1, 2007, and February 28, 2012.
Participants included patients with schizophrenia (n = 128) and matched healthy
controls (n = 130) from two academic centers and patients with bipolar I disorder
(n = 39) and matched healthy controls (n = 43) from a third site. Patients with
schizophrenia at each site in the top quartile on the proxy scale for the deficit
syndrome were classified as having deficit schizophrenia and those in the bottom 
quartile were classified as having nondeficit schizophrenia.
EXPOSURE: All participants underwent magnetic resonance brain imaging.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Network-level properties of cortical thickness were
assessed in each group. Interregional cortexwide coupling was compared among the 
groups, and graph theoretical approaches were used to assess network density and 
node degree, betweenness, closeness, and eigenvector centrality.
RESULTS: Stronger frontoparietal and frontotemporal coupling was found in
patients with deficit schizophrenia compared with those with nondeficit
schizophrenia (17 of 1326 pairwise relationships were significantly different, P 
< .05; 5% false discovery rate) and in patients with deficit schizophrenia
compared with healthy controls (49 of 1326 pairwise relationships were
significantly different, P < .05; 5% false discovery rate). Participants with
nondeficit schizophrenia and bipolar I disorder did not show significant
differences in coupling relative to those in the control groups (for both
comparisons, 0 of 1326 pairwise relationships were significantly different, P
> .05; 5% false discovery rate). The networks formed from patients with deficit
schizophrenia demonstrated increased density of connections relative to controls 
and nondeficit patients (range, 0.07-0.45 in controls, 0.09-0.43 in the
nondeficit group, and 0.18-0.67 in the deficit group). High centrality nodes were
identified in the supramarginal, middle, and superior temporal and inferior
frontal regions in deficit schizophrenia networks based on ranking of 4
centrality metrics. High centrality regions were identified as those that ranked 
in the top 10 in 50% or more of the thresholded networks in 3 or more of the
centrality measures. Network properties were similar in patients with deficit
schizophrenia from both study sites.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Patients with schizophrenia at one end of a spectrum
show characteristic signatures of altered intracortical relationships compared
with those at the other end of that spectrum, patients with bipolar I disorder,
and healthy individuals. Cortical connectomic approaches can be used to reliably 
identify neural signatures in clinically heterogeneous groups of patients.

PMID: 25786193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Mol Psychiatry. 2015 Dec;20(12):1579-87. doi: 10.1038/mp.2015.1. Epub 2015 Feb
24.

In-vivo imaging of grey and white matter neuroinflammation in Alzheimer's
disease: a positron emission tomography study with a novel radioligand,
[18F]-FEPPA.

Suridjan I(1,)(2), Pollock BG(2,)(3,)(4), Verhoeff NP(2,)(4,)(5), Voineskos
AN(1,)(2,)(3,)(4), Chow T(1,)(2,)(4,)(5,)(6), Rusjan PM(1), Lobaugh NJ(1,)(6),
Houle S(1,)(4), Mulsant BH(3,)(4), Mizrahi R(1,)(2,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Research Imaging Centre, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, ON, 
Canada. (2)Institute of Medical Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON,
Canada. (3)Geriatric Psychiatry Division, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health,
Toronto, ON, Canada. (4)Department of Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Toronto,
ON, Canada. (5)Centre for Mental Health, Baycrest Health Sciences, Toronto, ON,
Canada. (6)Department of Medicine (Neurology), University of Toronto, Toronto,
ON, Canada.

Our primary aim was to compare neuroinflammation in cognitively intact control
subjects and patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD) by using positron emission
tomography (PET) with translocator protein 18 kDa (TSPO)-specific radioligand
[(18)F]-FEPPA. [(18)F]-FEPPA PET scans were acquired on a high-resolution
research tomograph in 21 patients with AD (47- 81 years) and 21 control subjects 
(49-82 years). They were analyzed by using a 2-tissue compartment model with
arterial plasma input function. Differences in neuroinflammation, indexed as
[(18)F]-FEPPA binding were compared, adjusting for differences in binding
affinity class as determined by a single polymorphism in the TSPO gene (rs6971). 
In grey matter areas, [(18)F]-FEPPA was significantly higher in AD compared with 
healthy control subjects. Large increases were seen in the hippocampus,
prefrontal, temporal, parietal and occipital cortex (average Cohen's d= 0.89).
Voxel-based analyses confirmed significant clusters of neuroinflammation in the
frontal, temporal and parietal cortex in patients with AD. In white matter,
[(18)F]-FEPPA binding was elevated in the posterior limb of the internal capsule,
and the cingulum bundle. Higher neuroinflammation in the parietal cortex (r=
-0.7, P= 0.005), and posterior limb of the internal capsule (r= -0.8, P=0.001)
was associated with poorer visuospatial function. In addition, a higher
[(18)F]-FEPPA binding in the posterior limb of the internal capsule was
associated with a greater impairment in language ability (r= -0.7, P=0.004).
Elevated neuroinflammation can be detected in AD patients throughout the brain
grey and white matter by using [(18)F]-FEPPA PET. Our results also suggest that
neuroinflammation is associated with some cognitive deficits.

PMID: 25707397  [PubMed - in process]


14. Schizophr Res. 2015 Mar;162(1-3):222-33. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2015.01.021. Epub 
2015 Jan 30.

Minimal evidence that untreated psychosis damages brain structures: a systematic 
review.

Anderson KK(1), Rodrigues M(2), Mann K(3), Voineskos A(4), Mulsant BH(5), George 
TP(6), McKenzie KJ(7).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, 250 College Street, Toronto, Ontario
M5T 1R8, Canada. Electronic address: kelly.anderson@schulich.uwo.ca. (2)Centre
for Addiction and Mental Health, 250 College Street, Toronto, Ontario M5T 1R8,
Canada. Electronic address: myancarodrigues@gmail.com. (3)Centre for Addiction
and Mental Health, 250 College Street, Toronto, Ontario M5T 1R8, Canada.
Electronic address: kamalpreet.mann@mail.utoronto.ca. (4)Centre for Addiction and
Mental Health, 250 College Street, Toronto, Ontario M5T 1R8, Canada; Department
of Psychiatry, University of Toronto, 250 College Street, Toronto, Ontario M5T
1R8, Canada. Electronic address: aristotle.voineskos@camh.ca. (5)Centre for
Addiction and Mental Health, 250 College Street, Toronto, Ontario M5T 1R8,
Canada; Department of Psychiatry, University of Toronto, 250 College Street,
Toronto, Ontario M5T 1R8, Canada. Electronic address: benoit.mulsant@camh.ca.
(6)Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, 250 College Street, Toronto, Ontario
M5T 1R8, Canada; Department of Psychiatry, University of Toronto, 250 College
Street, Toronto, Ontario M5T 1R8, Canada. Electronic address:
tony.george@camh.ca. (7)Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, 250 College
Street, Toronto, Ontario M5T 1R8, Canada; Department of Psychiatry, University of
Toronto, 250 College Street, Toronto, Ontario M5T 1R8, Canada. Electronic
address: kwame.mckenzie@camh.ca.

INTRODUCTION: A longer duration of untreated psychosis (DUP) is associated with
poor outcomes in first-episode psychosis (FEP); however, it is unclear whether
this is due to the effects of psychosis on brain structure. We systematically
reviewed the literature on the association between the length of untreated
psychosis and brain structure in first-episode psychosis.
METHODS: We searched three electronic databases and conducted forward and
backward citation searching to identify relevant papers. Studies were included if
they: (1) included patients with a psychotic disorder who were treatment naïve or
minimally treated; and (2) had correlated measures of DUP or duration of
untreated illness (DUI) with structural measures.
RESULTS: We identified 48 studies that met the inclusion criteria. Forty-three
examined the correlation between DUP and brain structure, and 19 examined the
correlation between DUI and brain structure. There was evidence of significant
associations in brain regions considered important in psychosis; however, the
proportion of significant associations was low and the findings were inconsistent
across studies. The majority of included studies were not primarily designed to
examine whether DUP/DUI is correlated with brain structure, and there were
methodological limitations in many studies that prevent drawing a strong
conclusion.
CONCLUSION: To date, there is minimal evidence of an association between
untreated psychosis and brain structure in FEP. Although the body of literature
is substantial, there are few hypothesis-driven studies with a primary objective 
to answer this question. Future studies should be specifically designed to
examine whether untreated psychosis has a deleterious effect on brain structure.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25649287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. J Neurosci. 2015 Jan 28;35(4):1753-62. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3979-14.2015.

Functional consequences of neurite orientation dispersion and density in humans
across the adult lifespan.

Nazeri A(1), Chakravarty MM(2), Rotenberg DJ(3), Rajji TK(4), Rathi Y(5),
Michailovich OV(6), Voineskos AN(7).

Author information: 
(1)Kimel Family Translational Imaging-Genetics Laboratory, Research Imaging
Centre, Campbell Family Mental Health Institute, Centre for Addiction and Mental 
Health, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5T 1R8, Department of Psychiatry, University of
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5T 1R8. (2)Kimel Family Translational
Imaging-Genetics Laboratory, Research Imaging Centre, Campbell Family Mental
Health Institute, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada M5T 1R8, Department of Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada M5T 1R8, Cerebral Imaging Centre, Douglas Institute, Verdun,
Quebec, Canada H4H 1R3, Departments of Psychiatry and Biomedical Engineering,
McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3A 2B4. (3)Kimel Family
Translational Imaging-Genetics Laboratory, Research Imaging Centre, Campbell
Family Mental Health Institute, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada M5T 1R8. (4)Department of Psychiatry, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5T 1R8, Institute of Medical Science, University of
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5S 1A8, Geriatric Mental Health Service,
Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M6J 1H4.
(5)Laboratory of Mathematics in Imaging, Psychiatry Neuroimaging Laboratory,
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts
02215, and. (6)Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of
Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada N2L 3G1. (7)Kimel Family Translational
Imaging-Genetics Laboratory, Research Imaging Centre, Campbell Family Mental
Health Institute, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada M5T 1R8, Department of Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada M5T 1R8, Institute of Medical Science, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5S 1A8, Geriatric Mental Health Service, Centre for
Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M6J 1H4,
Aristotle.Voineskos@camh.ca.

As humans age, a characteristic pattern of widespread neocortical dendritic
disruption coupled with compensatory effects in hippocampus and other subcortical
structures is shown in postmortem investigations. It is now possible to address
age-related effects on gray matter (GM) neuritic organization and density in
humans using multishell diffusion-weighted MRI and the neurite-orientation
dispersion and density imaging (NODDI) model. In 45 healthy individuals across
the adult lifespan (21-84 years), we used a multishell diffusion imaging and the 
NODDI model to assess the intraneurite volume fraction and neurite
orientation-dispersion index (ODI) in GM tissues. We also determined the
functional correlates of variations in GM microstructure by obtaining
resting-state fMRI and behavioral data. We found a significant age-related
deficit in neocortical ODI (most prominently in frontoparietal regions), whereas 
increased ODI was observed in hippocampus and cerebellum with advancing age.
Neocortical ODI outperformed cortical thickness and white matter fractional
anisotropy for the prediction of chronological age in the same individuals.
Higher GM ODI sampled from resting-state networks with known age-related
susceptibility (default mode and visual association networks) was associated with
increased functional connectivity of these networks, whereas the task-positive
networks tended to show no association or even decreased connectivity. Frontal
pole ODI mediated the negative relationship of age with executive function,
whereas hippocampal ODI mediated the positive relationship of age with executive 
function. Our in vivo findings align very closely with the postmortem data and
provide evidence for vulnerability and compensatory neural mechanisms of aging in
GM microstructure that have functional and cognitive impact in vivo.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/351753-10$15.00/0.

PMCID: PMC4308611
PMID: 25632148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Can J Psychiatry. 2014 Oct;59(10):513-7.

The role of untreated psychosis in neurodegeneration: a review of hypothesized
mechanisms of neurotoxicity in first-episode psychosis.

Anderson KK(1), Voineskos A(2), Mulsant BH(3), George TP(4), Mckenzie KJ(5).

Author information: 
(1)Post-Doctoral Fellow, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto,
Ontario. (2)Koerner New Scientist and Head of Kimel-Family Translational
Imaging-Genetics Laboratory, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto,
Ontario; Assistant Professor, Department of Psychiatry, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario. (3)Physician-in-Chief, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, 
Toronto, Ontario; Professor, Department of Psychiatry, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario. (4)Clinical Director of the Schizophrenia Program and Medical
Director of the Complex Illness Program, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, 
Toronto, Ontario; Endowed Chair in Addiction Psychiatry and Professor, Department
of Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario. (5)Medical Director and
Director of Health Equity, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto,
Ontario; Co-Director of Equity, Gender, and Population Psychiatry and Professor, 
Department of Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario.

For over 20 years, studies have tried to measure the association between the
duration of untreated psychosis (DUP) and changes in brain morphology. A
hypothesis that untreated psychosis is neurotoxic has been postulated, but the
mechanisms of that toxicity have not been described. We re-analyzed papers
collected for a systematic review to extract data on the hypotheses that have
been generated on the potential mechanisms by which DUP could impact brain
morphology in first-episode psychosis. Dopaminergic hyperactivity, prolonged
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal activation, and persistent activity of
catecholamines have been hypothesized as mechanisms to explain these
associations. However, the question remains as to whether the observed structural
changes are permanent or may be reversed via antipsychotic treatment.

PMCID: PMC4197784
PMID: 25565683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Front Hum Neurosci. 2014 Aug 25;8:653. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2014.00653. eCollection
2014.

A review of structural neuroimaging in schizophrenia: from connectivity to
connectomics.

Wheeler AL(1), Voineskos AN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Kimel Family Translational Imaging Genetics Laboratory, Centre for Addiction
and Mental Health, Research Imaging Centre Toronto, ON, Canada ; Department of
Psychiatry, University of Toronto Toronto, ON, Canada.

In patients with schizophrenia neuroimaging studies have revealed global
differences with some brain regions showing focal abnormalities. Examining
neurocircuitry, diffusion-weighted imaging studies have identified altered
structural integrity of white matter in frontal and temporal brain regions and
tracts such as the cingulum bundles, uncinate fasciculi, internal capsules and
corpus callosum associated with the illness. Furthermore, structural co-variance 
analyses have revealed altered structural relationships among regional morphology
in the thalamus, frontal, temporal and parietal cortices in schizophrenia
patients. The distributed nature of these abnormalities in schizophrenia suggests
that multiple brain circuits are impaired, a neural feature that may be better
addressed with network level analyses. However, even with the advent of these
newer analyses, a large amount of variability in findings remains, likely
partially due to the considerable heterogeneity present in this disorder.

PMCID: PMC4142355
PMID: 25202257  [PubMed]


18. Schizophr Bull. 2015 Mar;41(2):374-81. doi: 10.1093/schbul/sbu114. Epub 2014 Aug 
6.

The impact of aging, cognition, and symptoms on functional competence in
individuals with schizophrenia across the lifespan.

Kalache SM(1), Mulsant BH(1), Davies SJ(1), Liu AY(1), Voineskos AN(1), Butters
MA(2), Miranda D(3), Menon M(1), Kern RS(4), Rajji TK(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Geriatric Psychiatry, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health,
Toronto, Canada; Department of Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Toronto,
Canada; (2)Department of Psychiatry, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA;
(3)Division of Geriatric Psychiatry, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health,
Toronto, Canada; (4)Department of Psychiatry and Department of Veterans Affairs
VISN 22 MIRECC, University of California, Los Angeles, CA. (5)Division of
Geriatric Psychiatry, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, Canada;
Department of Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada;
Tarek.Rajji@camh.ca.

OBJECTIVE: Life expectancy in individuals with schizophrenia continues to
increase. It is not clear whether cognitive deficits associated with
schizophrenia remain as strong predictors of function in older and younger
individuals. Thus, we assessed the relationship between cognition and functional 
competence in individuals with schizophrenia across 7 decades of life.
METHODS: We analyzed data obtained in 232 community-dwelling participants with
schizophrenia (age range: 19-79 years). Cognition was assessed using the
Measurement and Treatment Research to Improve Cognition in Schizophrenia
Consensus Cognitive Battery. Functional competence was assessed using the UCSD
Performance-based Skills Assessment, which includes measures of Comprehension and
Planning of Recreational Activities Skills, Financial Skills, Communication
Skills, Transportation Skills, and Household Management Skills. To assess the
effects of Global Cognition on functional competence, we performed hierarchical
multivariate linear or logistic regression analyses controlling for age,
education, gender, and negative symptoms.
RESULTS: Participants' mean age was 49.1 (SD = 13.2, range = 19-79 years), 161
(69%) were male, and 55 (24%) were aged ≥60. Global Cognition was a predictor of 
Comprehension and Planning Skills (Exp(β) = 1.048), Financial Skills (Exp(β) =
1.104), Communication Skills (ΔR (2) = .31) and Transportation Skills (Exp(β) =
1.066), but not Household Management Skills after adjusting for age, education,
gender, and negative symptoms of schizophrenia.
CONCLUSION: Cognition remains a strong predictor of functional competence across 
the lifespan. These findings suggest that treating cognitive impairment
associated with schizophrenia could improve individuals' function independent of 
their age.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Maryland
Psychiatric Research Center. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4332950 [Available on 2016-03-01]
PMID: 25103208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Synapse. 2014 Nov;68(11):536-47. doi: 10.1002/syn.21765. Epub 2014 Jul 28.

Quantitative imaging of neuroinflammation in human white matter: a positron
emission tomography study with translocator protein 18 kDa radioligand,
[18F]-FEPPA.

Suridjan I(1), Rusjan PM, Kenk M, Verhoeff NP, Voineskos AN, Rotenberg D, Wilson 
AA, Meyer JH, Houle S, Mizrahi R.

Author information: 
(1)Research Imaging Centre, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto,
Ontario, M5T 1R8, Canada; Institute of Medical Science, University of Toronto,
Ontario, M5S 1A8, Canada.

The ability to quantify translocator protein 18 kDa (TSPO) in white matter (WM)
is important to understand the role of neuroinflammation in neurological
disorders with WM involvement. This article aims to extend the utility of TSPO
imaging in WM using a second-generation radioligand, [18F]-FEPPA, and
high-resolution research tomograph (HRRT) positron emission tomography (PET)
camera system. Four WM regions of interests (WM-ROI), relevant to the study of
aging and neuroinflammatory diseases, were examined. The corpus callosum,
cingulum bundle, superior longitudinal fasciculus, and posterior limb of internal
capsule were delineated automatically onto subject's T1 -weighted magnetic
resonance image using a diffusion tensor imaging-based WM template. The TSPO
polymorphism (rs6971) stratified individuals to three genetic groups:
high-affinity binders (HAB), mixed-affinity binders (MAB), and low-affinity
binders. [18F]-FEPPA PET scans were acquired on 32 healthy subjects and analyzed 
using a full kinetic compartment analysis. The two-tissue compartment model
showed moderate identifiability (coefficient of variation 15-19%) for [18F]-FEPPA
total volume distribution (VT ) in WM-ROIs. Noise affects VT variability,
although its effect on bias was small (6%). In a worst-case scenario, ≤6% of
simulated data did not fit reliably. A simulation of increased TSPO density
exposed minimal effect on variability and identifiability of [18F]-FEPPA VT in
WM-ROIs. We found no association between age and [18F]-FEPPA VT in WM-ROIs. The
VT values were 15% higher in HAB than in MAB, although the difference was not
statistically significant. This study provides evidence for the utility and
limitations of [18F]-FEPPA PET to measure TSPO expression in WM.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25043159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Schizophr Res. 2015 Jan;161(1):50-60. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2014.03.034. Epub
2014 Jun 2.

Genetic underpinnings of white matter 'connectivity': heritability, risk, and
heterogeneity in schizophrenia.

Voineskos AN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Kimel Family Translational Imaging-Genetics Laboratory, Research Imaging
Centre, Campbell Family Mental Health Institute, Centre for Addiction and Mental 
Health, Canada; Institute of Medical Science, University of Toronto, Canada;
Department of Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Canada. Electronic address:
Aristotle.Voineskos@camh.ca.

Schizophrenia is a highly heritable disorder. Thus, the combination of genetics
and brain imaging may be a useful strategy to investigate the effects of risk
genes on anatomical connectivity, and for gene discovery, i.e. discovering the
genetic correlates of white matter phenotypes. Following a database search, I
review evidence for heritability of white matter phenotypes. I also review
candidate gene investigations, examining association of putative risk variants
with white matter phenotypes, as well as the recent flurry of research exploring 
relationships of genome-wide significant risk loci with white matter phenotypes. 
Finally, I review multivariate and polygene approaches, which constitute a new
wave of imaging-genetics research, including large collaborative initiatives
aiming to discover new genes that may predict aspects of white matter
microstructure. The literature supports the heritability of white matter
phenotypes. Loci in genes intimately implicated in oligodendrocyte and myelin
development, growth and maintenance, and neurotrophic systems are associated with
white matter microstructure. GWAS variants have not yet sufficiently been
explored using DTI-based evaluation of white matter to draw conclusions, although
micro-RNA 137 is promising due to its potential regulation of other GWAS
schizophrenia genes. Many imaging-genetic studies only include healthy
participants, which, while helping control for certain confounds, cannot address 
questions related to disease heterogeneity or symptom expression, and thus more
studies should include participants with schizophrenia. With sufficiently large
sample sizes, the future of this field lies in polygene strategies aimed at risk 
prediction and heterogeneity dissection of schizophrenia that can translate to
personalized interventions.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4250447
PMID: 24893906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. J Neurosci. 2014 Apr 30;34(18):6367-76. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2818-13.2014.

Brain white matter development is associated with a human-specific haplotype
increasing the synthesis of long chain fatty acids.

Peters BD(1), Voineskos AN, Szeszko PR, Lett TA, DeRosse P, Guha S, Karlsgodt KH,
Ikuta T, Felsky D, John M, Rotenberg DJ, Kennedy JL, Lencz T, Malhotra AK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Psychiatry Research, Zucker Hillside Hospital, Glen Oaks, New York
11004, Campbell Family Mental Health Institute, Centre for Addiction and Mental
Health, Toronto, Ontario M5T 1R8, Canada, Institute of Medical Science,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5S 1A8, Canada, Department of
Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5T 1R8, Canada, Center for
Psychiatric Neuroscience, Feinstein Institute for Medical Research, Manhasset,
New York 11030, and Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, School of
Applied Sciences, University of Mississippi, University, Mississippi 38766.

The genetic and molecular pathways driving human brain white matter (WM)
development are only beginning to be discovered. Long chain polyunsaturated fatty
acids (LC-PUFAs) have been implicated in myelination in animal models and humans.
The biosynthesis of LC-PUFAs is regulated by the fatty acid desaturase (FADS)
genes, of which a human-specific haplotype is strongly associated with ω-3 and
ω-6 LC-PUFA concentrations in blood. To investigate the relationship between
LC-PUFA synthesis and human brain WM development, we examined whether this FADS
haplotype is associated with age-related WM differences across the life span in
healthy individuals 9-86 years of age (n = 207). Diffusion tensor imaging was
performed to measure fractional anisotropy (FA), a putative measure of
myelination, of the cerebral WM tracts. FADS haplotype status was determined with
a single nucleotide polymorphism (rs174583) that tags this haplotype. Overall,
normal age-related WM differences were observed, including higher FA values in
early adulthood compared with childhood, followed by lower FA values across older
age ranges. However, individuals homozygous for the minor allele (associated with
lower LC-PUFA concentrations) did not display these normal age-related WM
differences (significant age × genotype interactions, p(corrected) < 0.05). These
findings suggest that LC-PUFAs are involved in human brain WM development from
childhood into adulthood. This haplotype and LC-PUFAs may play a role in
myelin-related disorders of neurodevelopmental origin.

PMCID: PMC4004819
PMID: 24790207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Neuroimage. 2014 Nov 1;101:494-512. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.04.054. Epub
2014 Apr 29.

Multi-atlas segmentation of the whole hippocampus and subfields using multiple
automatically generated templates.

Pipitone J(1), Park MT(2), Winterburn J(2), Lett TA(3), Lerch JP(4), Pruessner
JC(5), Lepage M(6), Voineskos AN(7), Chakravarty MM(8); Alzheimer's Disease
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information: 
(1)Kimel Family Translational Imaging-Genetics Lab, Centre for Addiction and
Mental Health, Toronto, ON, Canada. Electronic address: jon.pipitone@utoronto.ca.
(2)Kimel Family Translational Imaging-Genetics Lab, Centre for Addiction and
Mental Health, Toronto, ON, Canada. (3)Kimel Family Translational
Imaging-Genetics Lab, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, ON,
Canada; Institute of Medical Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(4)Neurosciences and Mental Health Laboratory, Hospital for Sick Children,
Toronto, ON, Canada; Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto,
Toronto, ON, Canada. (5)Douglas Mental Health University Institute, Verdun, QC,
Canada. (6)Douglas Mental Health University Institute, Verdun, QC, Canada;
Department of Psychiatry, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada. (7)Kimel
Family Translational Imaging-Genetics Lab, Centre for Addiction and Mental
Health, Toronto, ON, Canada; Department of Psychiatry, University of Toronto,
Toronto, ON, Canada; Institute of Medical Science, University of Toronto,
Toronto, ON, Canada. (8)Kimel Family Translational Imaging-Genetics Lab, Centre
for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, ON, Canada; Department of Psychiatry,
University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada; Institute of Biomaterials and
Biomedical Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada; Rotman
Research Institute, Baycrest, Toronto, ON, Canada. Electronic address:
mallar.chak@gmail.com.

INTRODUCTION: Advances in image segmentation of magnetic resonance images (MRI)
have demonstrated that multi-atlas approaches improve segmentation over regular
atlas-based approaches. These approaches often rely on a large number of manually
segmented atlases (e.g. 30-80) that take significant time and expertise to
produce. We present an algorithm, MAGeT-Brain (Multiple Automatically Generated
Templates), for the automatic segmentation of the hippocampus that minimises the 
number of atlases needed whilst still achieving similar agreement to multi-atlas 
approaches. Thus, our method acts as a reliable multi-atlas approach when using
special or hard-to-define atlases that are laborious to construct.
METHOD: MAGeT-Brain works by propagating atlas segmentations to a template
library, formed from a subset of target images, via transformations estimated by 
nonlinear image registration. The resulting segmentations are then propagated to 
each target image and fused using a label fusion method. We conduct two separate 
Monte Carlo cross-validation experiments comparing MAGeT-Brain and basic
multi-atlas whole hippocampal segmentation using differing atlas and template
library sizes, and registration and label fusion methods. The first experiment is
a 10-fold validation (per parameter setting) over 60 subjects taken from the
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Database (ADNI), and the second is a five-fold
validation over 81 subjects having had a first episode of psychosis. In both
cases, automated segmentations are compared with manual segmentations following
the Pruessner-protocol. Using the best settings found from these experiments, we 
segment 246 images of the ADNI1:Complete 1Yr 1.5 T dataset and compare these with
segmentations from existing automated and semi-automated methods: FSL FIRST,
FreeSurfer, MAPER, and SNT. Finally, we conduct a leave-one-out cross-validation 
of hippocampal subfield segmentation in standard 3T T1-weighted images, using
five high-resolution manually segmented atlases (Winterburn et al., 2013).
RESULTS: In the ADNI cross-validation, using 9 atlases MAGeT-Brain achieves a
mean Dice's Similarity Coefficient (DSC) score of 0.869 with respect to manual
whole hippocampus segmentations, and also exhibits significantly lower
variability in DSC scores than multi-atlas segmentation. In the younger,
psychosis dataset, MAGeT-Brain achieves a mean DSC score of 0.892 and produces
volumes which agree with manual segmentation volumes better than those produced
by the FreeSurfer and FSL FIRST methods (mean difference in volume: 80 mm(3),
1600 mm(3), and 800 mm(3), respectively). Similarly, in the ADNI1:Complete 1Yr
1.5 T dataset, MAGeT-Brain produces hippocampal segmentations well correlated
(r>0.85) with SNT semi-automated reference volumes within disease categories, and
shows a conservative bias and a mean difference in volume of 250 mm(3) across the
entire dataset, compared with FreeSurfer and FSL FIRST which both overestimate
volume differences by 2600 mm(3) and 2800 mm(3) on average, respectively.
Finally, MAGeT-Brain segments the CA1, CA4/DG and subiculum subfields on standard
3T T1-weighted resolution images with DSC overlap scores of 0.56, 0.65, and 0.58,
respectively, relative to manual segmentations.
CONCLUSION: We demonstrate that MAGeT-Brain produces consistent whole hippocampal
segmentations using only 9 atlases, or fewer, with various hippocampal
definitions, disease populations, and image acquisition types. Additionally, we
show that MAGeT-Brain identifies hippocampal subfields in standard 3T T1-weighted
images with overlap scores comparable to competing methods.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24784800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Neuroimage. 2014 Jul 15;95:217-31. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.03.037. Epub
2014 Mar 21.

Derivation of high-resolution MRI atlases of the human cerebellum at 3T and
segmentation using multiple automatically generated templates.

Park MT(1), Pipitone J(2), Baer LH(3), Winterburn JL(2), Shah Y(2), Chavez S(4), 
Schira MM(5), Lobaugh NJ(6), Lerch JP(7), Voineskos AN(8), Chakravarty MM(9).

Author information: 
(1)Kimel Family Translational Imaging Genetics Research Laboratory, Research
Imaging Centre, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, Canada.
Electronic address: mtpark89@gmail.com. (2)Kimel Family Translational Imaging
Genetics Research Laboratory, Research Imaging Centre, Centre for Addiction and
Mental Health, Toronto, Canada. (3)Department of Psychology, Concordia
University, Montreal, QC, Canada. (4)MRI Unit, Research Imaging Centre, Centre
for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, Canada; Department of Psychiatry,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada. (5)School of Psychology, University of
Wollongong, Wollongong, NSW, Australia; Neuroscience Research Australia, Sydney, 
NSW, Australia. (6)MRI Unit, Research Imaging Centre, Centre for Addiction and
Mental Health, Toronto, Canada; Division of Neurology, Department of Medicine,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada. (7)Program in Neuroscience and Mental
Health, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Canada; Department of Medical
Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada. (8)Kimel Family Translational
Imaging Genetics Research Laboratory, Research Imaging Centre, Centre for
Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, Canada; Department of Psychiatry,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada. (9)Kimel Family Translational Imaging
Genetics Research Laboratory, Research Imaging Centre, Centre for Addiction and
Mental Health, Toronto, Canada; Department of Psychiatry, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Canada; Institute of Biomaterials and Biomedical Engineering, University
of Toronto, Toronto, Canada. Electronic address: mallar.chakravarty@camh.ca.

The cerebellum has classically been linked to motor learning and coordination.
However, there is renewed interest in the role of the cerebellum in non-motor
functions such as cognition and in the context of different neuropsychiatric
disorders. The contribution of neuroimaging studies to advancing understanding of
cerebellar structure and function has been limited, partly due to the cerebellum 
being understudied as a result of contrast and resolution limitations of standard
structural magnetic resonance images (MRI). These limitations inhibit proper
visualization of the highly compact and detailed cerebellar foliations. In
addition, there is a lack of robust algorithms that automatically and reliably
identify the cerebellum and its subregions, further complicating the design of
large-scale studies of the cerebellum. As such, automated segmentation of the
cerebellar lobules would allow detailed population studies of the cerebellum and 
its subregions. In this manuscript, we describe a novel set of high-resolution in
vivo atlases of the cerebellum developed by pairing MR imaging with a carefully
validated manual segmentation protocol. Using these cerebellar atlases as inputs,
we validate a novel automated segmentation algorithm that takes advantage of the 
neuroanatomical variability that exists in a given population under study in
order to automatically identify the cerebellum, and its lobules. Our automatic
segmentation results demonstrate good accuracy in the identification of all
lobules (mean Kappa [κ]=0.731; range 0.40-0.89), and the entire cerebellum (mean 
κ=0.925; range 0.90-0.94) when compared to "gold-standard" manual segmentations. 
These results compare favorably in comparison to other publically available
methods for automatic segmentation of the cerebellum. The completed cerebellar
atlases are available freely online (http://imaging-genetics.camh.ca/cerebellum) 
and can be customized to the unique neuroanatomy of different subjects using the 
proposed segmentation pipeline (https://github.com/pipitone/MAGeTbrain).

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24657354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2014 Aug;17(8):1129-38. doi:
10.1017/S1461145714000042. Epub 2014 Feb 14.

Changes in brain functional connectivity after chronic haloperidol in rats: a
network analysis.

Wheeler AL(1), Creed MC(2), Voineskos AN(1), Nobrega JN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Research Imaging Centre, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health,Canada.
(2)Behavioural Neurobiology Laboratory, Campbell Family Mental Health Research
Institute, Center for Addiction and Mental Health,Canada.

Although the effects of haloperidol (HAL) have been extensively examined in
experimental animals at the cellular and brain regional levels, the effects of
prolonged HAL treatment on functional connectivity in the brain have not yet been
addressed. Here we used expression of the immediate early gene zif268 as a marker
of neural activity to examine changes in brain regional interactivity after 12 wk
of HAL treatment in rats. zif268 expression was measured by in situ hybridization
in 83 brain regions of HAL- and vehicle (VEH)-treated controls and correlations
among all brain regions were computed separately for the two treatment groups.
The strongest correlations in each group were used for network construction. It
was found that VEH and HAL networks were equally segregated and integrated, and
that both networks display small world organization. Compared to the VEH network,
the HAL network showed enhanced interactivity between the dorsolateral striatum
and thalamus, and between different subdivisions of the thalamus. It will be of
interest to determine the extent to which the observed changes in functional
connectivity may be related to dyskinesias, to changes in motivated behaviours
and/or to the therapeutic effects of chronic HAL. By identifying the connectivity
features of a chronic HAL network in the absence of other manipulations, the
current findings may provide a reference signature pattern to be targeted in
future efforts to discriminate between the neural bases of different behavioural 
outcomes arising from chronic HAL treatment.

PMID: 24524273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Mol Psychiatry. 2014 Oct;19(10):1125-32. doi: 10.1038/mp.2013.142. Epub 2013 Oct 
29.

The SORL1 gene and convergent neural risk for Alzheimer's disease across the
human lifespan.

Felsky D(1), Szeszko P(2), Yu L(3), Honer WG(4), De Jager PL(5), Schneider JA(6),
Malhotra AK(2), Lencz T(2), Ikuta T(7), Pipitone J(8), Chakravarty MM(9), Lobaugh
NJ(8), Mulsant BH(1), Pollock BG(1), Kennedy JL(1), Bennett DA(3), Voineskos
AN(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Department of Psychiatry,
University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada [2] Institute of Medical Science,
University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. (2)1] Division of Psychiatry
Research, Zucker Hillside Hospital, North Shore-LIJ Health System, Glen Oaks, NY,
USA [2] Center for Psychiatric Neuroscience, The Feinstein Institute for Medical 
Research, Manhasset, NY, USA [3] Departments of Psychiatry and Molecular
Medicine, Hofstra North Shore-LIJ School of Medicine, Hempstead, NY, USA. (3)1]
Department of Neurological Sciences, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, IL,
USA [2] Rush Alzheimer's Disease Center, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago,
IL, USA. (4)BC Mental Health and Addictions Research Institute, University of
British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada. (5)1] Program in Translational
NeuroPsychiatric Genomics, Department of Neurology, Brigham and Women's Hospital,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA [2] Program in Medical and Population
Genetics, Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA, USA. (6)Rush Alzheimer's Disease
Center, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, IL, USA. (7)Department of
Communication Sciences and Disorders, School of Applied Science, University of
Mississippi, Oxford, MS, USA. (8)Centre for Addiction and Mental Health,
Department of Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. (9)1]
Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Department of Psychiatry, University of
Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada [2] Institute of Biomaterials and Biomedical
Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.

Prior to intervention trials in individuals genetically at-risk for late-onset
Alzheimer's disease, critical first steps are identifying where (neuroanatomic
effects), when (timepoint in the lifespan) and how (gene expression and
neuropathology) Alzheimer's risk genes impact the brain. We hypothesized that
variants in the sortilin-like receptor (SORL1) gene would affect multiple
Alzheimer's phenotypes before the clinical onset of symptoms. Four independent
samples were analyzed to determine effects of SORL1 genetic risk variants across 
the lifespan at multiple phenotypic levels: (1) microstructural integrity of
white matter using diffusion tensor imaging in two healthy control samples
(n=118, age 18-86; n=68, age 8-40); (2) gene expression using the Braincloud
postmortem healthy control sample (n=269, age 0-92) and (3) Alzheimer's
neuropathology (amyloid plaques and tau tangles) using a postmortem sample of
healthy, mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and Alzheimer's individuals (n=710, age 
66-108). SORL1 risk variants predicted lower white matter fractional anisotropy
in an age-independent manner in fronto-temporal white matter tracts in both
samples at 5% family-wise error-corrected thresholds. SORL1 risk variants also
predicted decreased SORL1 mRNA expression, most prominently during childhood and 
adolescence, and significantly predicted increases in amyloid pathology in
postmortem brain. Importantly, the effects of SORL1 variation on both white
matter microstructure and gene expression were observed during neurodevelopmental
phases of the human lifespan. Further, the neuropathological mechanism of risk
appears to primarily involve amyloidogenic pathways. Interventions targeted
toward the SORL1 amyloid risk pathway may be of greatest value during early
phases of the lifespan.

PMCID: PMC4004725
PMID: 24166411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Neuroimage. 2014 Jan 1;84:868-75. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.09.021. Epub
2013 Sep 21.

Neuroinflammation in healthy aging: a PET study using a novel Translocator
Protein 18kDa (TSPO) radioligand, [(18)F]-FEPPA.

Suridjan I(1), Rusjan PM, Voineskos AN, Selvanathan T, Setiawan E, Strafella AP, 
Wilson AA, Meyer JH, Houle S, Mizrahi R.

Author information: 
(1)Research Imaging Centre, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, 250 College
Street, M5T 1R8, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

One of the cellular markers of neuroinflammation is increased microglia
activation, characterized by overexpression of mitochondrial 18kDa Translocator
Protein (TSPO). TSPO expression can be quantified in-vivo using the positron
emission tomography (PET) radioligand [(18)F]-FEPPA. This study examined
microglial activation as measured with [(18)F]-FEPPA PET across the adult
lifespan in a group of healthy volunteers. We performed genotyping for the rs6971
TS.PO gene polymorphism to control for the known variability in binding affinity.
Thirty-three healthy volunteers (age range: 19-82years; 22 high affinity binders 
(HAB), 11 mixed affinity binders (MAB)) underwent [(18)F]-FEPPA PET scans,
acquired on the High Resolution Research Tomograph (HRRT) and analyzed using a
2-tissue compartment model. Regression analyses were performed to examine the
effect of age adjusting for genetic status on [(18)F]-FEPPA total distribution
volumes (VT) in the hippocampus, temporal, and prefrontal cortex. We found no
significant effect of age on [(18)F]-FEPPA VT (F (1,30)=0.918; p=0.346), and a
significant effect of genetic polymorphism (F (1,30)=8.767; p=0.006). This is the
first in-vivo study to evaluate age-related changes in TSPO binding, using the
new generation TSPO radioligands. Increased neuroinflammation, as measured with
[(18)F]-FEPPA PET was not associated with normal aging, suggesting that healthy
elderly individuals may serve as useful benchmark against patients with
neurodegenerative disorders where neuroinflammation may be present.

Crown Copyright © 2013. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24064066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. J Psychiatr Res. 2013 Nov;47(11):1760-5. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2013.07.025.
Epub 2013 Sep 6.

Association study of the vesicular monoamine transporter gene SLC18A2 with
tardive dyskinesia.

Zai CC(1), Tiwari AK, Mazzoco M, de Luca V, Müller DJ, Shaikh SA, Lohoff FW,
Freeman N, Voineskos AN, Potkin SG, Lieberman JA, Meltzer HY, Remington G,
Kennedy JL.

Author information: 
(1)Neurogenetics Section, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, ON,
Canada.

Tardive dyskinesia (TD) is an involuntary movement disorder that can occur in up 
to 25% of patients receiving long-term first-generation antipsychotic treatment. 
Its etiology is unclear, but family studies suggest that genetic factors play an 
important role in contributing to risk for TD. The vesicular monoamine
transporter 2 (VMAT2) is an interesting candidate for genetic studies of TD
because it regulates the release of neurotransmitters implicated in TD, including
dopamine, serotonin, and GABA. VMAT2 is also a target of tetrabenazine, a drug
used in the treatment of hyperkinetic movement disorders, including TD. We
examined nine single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the SLC18A2 gene that
encodes VMAT2 for association with TD in our sample of chronic schizophrenia
patients (n = 217). We found a number of SNPs to be nominally associated with TD 
occurrence and the Abnormal Involuntary Movement Scale (AIMS), including the
rs2015586 marker which was previously found associated with TD in the CATIE
sample (Tsai et al., 2010), as well as the rs363224 marker, with the
low-expression AA genotype appearing to be protective against TD (p = 0.005). We 
further found the rs363224 marker to interact with the putative functional D2
receptor rs6277 (C957T) polymorphism (p = 0.001), supporting the dopamine
hypothesis of TD. Pending further replication, VMAT2 may be considered a
therapeutic target for the treatment and/or prevention of TD.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24018103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Biol Psychiatry. 2014 Mar 1;75(5):361-70. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2013.07.026.
Epub 2013 Sep 5.

Treating working memory deficits in schizophrenia: a review of the neurobiology.

Lett TA(1), Voineskos AN(2), Kennedy JL(2), Levine B(3), Daskalakis ZJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Institute of
Medical Science, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (2)Centre for Addiction and Mental
Health, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Institute of Medical Science, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada; Department of Psychiatry, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (3)Department of
Psychology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Rotman Research
Institute, Baycrest Centre Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (4)Centre for
Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Institute of Medical
Science, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Department of Psychiatry, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada. Electronic address: Jeff.Daskalakis@camh.ca.

Cognitive deficits are a core feature of schizophrenia. Among these deficits,
working memory impairment is considered a central cognitive impairment in
schizophrenia. The prefrontal cortex, a region critical for working memory
performance, has been demonstrated as a critical liability region in
schizophrenia. As yet, there are no standardized treatment options for working
memory deficits in schizophrenia. In this review, we summarize the neuronal basis
for working memory impairment in schizophrenia, including dysfunction in
prefrontal signaling pathways (e.g., γ-aminobutyric acid transmission) and neural
network synchrony (e.g., gamma/theta oscillations). We discuss therapeutic
strategies for working memory dysfunction such as pharmacological agents,
cognitive remediation therapy, and repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation. 
Despite the drawbacks of current approaches, the advances in neurobiological and 
translational treatment strategies suggest that clinical application of these
methods will occur in the near future.

Copyright © 2014 Society of Biological Psychiatry. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 24011822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 20;8(8):e72375. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072375. eCollection
2013.

White matter deficits in psychopathic offenders and correlation with factor
structure.

Hoppenbrouwers SS(1), Nazeri A, de Jesus DR, Stirpe T, Felsky D, Schutter DJ,
Daskalakis ZJ, Voineskos AN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Psychology, Utrecht University, Utrecht, Utrecht,
The Netherlands.

Psychopathic offenders show a persistent pattern of emotional unresponsivity to
the often horrendous crimes they perpetrate. Recent studies have related
psychopathy to alterations in white matter. Therefore, diffusion tensor imaging
followed by tract-based spatial statistics (TBSS) analysis in 11 psychopathic
offenders matched to 11 healthy controls was completed. Fractional anisotropy was
calculated within each voxel and comparisons were made between groups using a
permutation test. Any clusters of white matter voxels different between groups
were submitted to probabilistic tractography. Significant differences in
fractional anisotropy were found between psychopathic offenders and healthy
controls in three main white matter clusters. These three clusters represented
two major networks: an amygdalo-prefrontal network, and a striato-thalamo-frontal
network. The interpersonal/affective component of the PCL-R correlated with white
matter deficits in the orbitofrontal cortex and frontal pole whereas the
antisocial component correlated with deficits in the striato-thalamo-frontal
network. In addition to replicating earlier work concerning disruption of an
amygdala-prefrontal network, we show for the first time that white matter
integrity in a striato-thalamo-frontal network is disrupted in psychopathic
offenders. The novelty of our findings lies in the two dissociable white matter
networks that map directly onto the two major factors of psychopathy.

PMCID: PMC3748110
PMID: 23977291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Schizophr Bull. 2014 Jul;40(4):914-24. doi: 10.1093/schbul/sbt100. Epub 2013 Jul 
20.

Disrupted prefrontal interhemispheric structural coupling in schizophrenia
related to working memory performance.

Wheeler AL(1), Chakravarty MM(2), Lerch JP(3), Pipitone J(2), Daskalakis ZJ(4),
Rajji TK(5), Mulsant BH(6), Voineskos AN(7).

Author information: 
(1)Kimel Family Translational Imaging Genetics Laboratory, Research Imaging
Centre, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, ON, Canada; Department
of Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada; (2)Kimel Family
Translational Imaging Genetics Laboratory, Research Imaging Centre, Centre for
Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, ON, Canada; (3)Program in Neuroscience and 
Mental Health, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada; Department of
Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada; (4)Department of 
Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada; Institute of Medical
Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada; Temerty Centre for
Therapeutic Brain Intervention, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, 
ON, Canada; (5)Department of Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON,
Canada; (6)Kimel Family Translational Imaging Genetics Laboratory, Research
Imaging Centre, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, ON, Canada;
Department of Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada; Institute
of Medical Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada; (7)Kimel Family
Translational Imaging Genetics Laboratory, Research Imaging Centre, Centre for
Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, ON, Canada; Department of Psychiatry,
University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada; Institute of Medical Science,
University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada; aristotle.voineskos@camh.ca.

BACKGROUND: Prominent regional cortical thickness reductions have been shown in
schizophrenia. In contrast, little is known regarding alterations of structural
coupling between regions in schizophrenia and how these alterations may be
related to cognitive impairments in this disorder.
METHODS: T1-weighted magnetic resonance images were acquired in 54 patients with 
schizophrenia and 68 healthy control subjects aged 18-55 years. Cortical
thickness was compared between groups using a vertex-wise approach. To assess
structural coupling, seeds were selected within regions of reduced thickness, and
brain-wide cortical thickness correlations were compared between groups. The
relationships between identified patterns of circuit structure disruption and
cognitive task performance were then explored.
RESULTS: Prominent cortical thickness reductions were found in patients compared 
with controls at a 5% false discovery rate in a predominantly frontal and
temporal pattern. Correlations of the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC)
with right prefrontal regions were significantly different in patients and
controls. The difference remained significant in a subset of 20 first-episode
patients. Participants with stronger frontal interhemispheric thickness
correlations had poorer working memory performance.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified structural impairment in a left-right DLPFC circuit in
patients with schizophrenia independent of illness stage or medication exposure. 
The relationship between left-right DLPFC thickness correlations and working
memory performance implicates prefrontal interhemispheric circuit impairment as a
vulnerability pathway for poor working memory performance. Our findings could
guide the development of novel therapeutic interventions aimed at improving
working memory performance in patients with schizophrenia.

© The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Maryland
Psychiatric Research Center. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4059434
PMID: 23873858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. JAMA Psychiatry. 2013 Jun;70(6):646-7. doi: 10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2013.865.

APOE ϵ 4, aging, and effects on white matter across the adult life span.

Felsky D, Voineskos AN.

Comment on
    Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2012 Aug;69(8):804-13.

PMID: 23740051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2013 Sep;38(10):1954-62. doi: 10.1038/npp.2013.93. Epub 
2013 Apr 16.

Alterations of superficial white matter in schizophrenia and relationship to
cognitive performance.

Nazeri A(1), Chakravarty MM, Felsky D, Lobaugh NJ, Rajji TK, Mulsant BH,
Voineskos AN.

Author information: 
(1)Kimel Family Translational Imaging-Genetics Laboratory, Toronto, ON, Canada.

Post-mortem studies have demonstrated alterations in superficial white matter
(SWM) in schizophrenia patients. Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) can be used to
assess SWM in vivo, and compare SWM fractional anisotropy (FA) in schizophrenia
patients vs healthy controls. The assessment of SWM in vivo also provides an
opportunity to identify novel neural correlates of cognitive performance, and
potential cognitive impairment in schizophrenia patients. Forty-four patients
with schizophrenia and 44 matched healthy controls underwent neuroimaging and
cognitive protocols. Using an SWM mask and tract-based spatial statistics,
differences in SWM-FA were examined between groups. SWM-FA clusters different
between groups were then used to predict cognitive performance with multiple
linear regression. The relative contribution of SWM fiber subtypes (deep white
matter extensions vs U-fibers and intraregional fibers) from significantly
different clusters was examined. Compared to controls, patients with
schizophrenia had reduced FA in five SWM clusters: the largest a left posterior
parieto-occipital cluster, followed by four clusters in the left frontal lobe.
SWM-FA in the frontal lobe clusters predicted attention, working memory, and
processing speed performance in healthy controls, but not in patients with
schizophrenia. The majority of streamlines tracked from these clusters were
restricted to U-fibers and intraregional fibers, rather than deep white matter
extensions. Our analyses revealed prominent SWM disruption in patients with
schizophrenia compared to controls. SWM-cognition relationships shown in healthy 
individuals were disrupted in patients with schizophrenia. SWM may be an
important neurobiological substrate of cognitive performance and a novel cortical
treatment target for cognitive deficits in schizophrenia patients.

PMCID: PMC3746702
PMID: 23591167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. JAMA Psychiatry. 2013 May;70(5):472-80. doi: 10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2013.786.

Neuroimaging evidence for the deficit subtype of schizophrenia.

Voineskos AN(1), Foussias G, Lerch J, Felsky D, Remington G, Rajji TK, Lobaugh N,
Pollock BG, Mulsant BH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto,
Canada. aristotle.voineskos@camh.ca

IMPORTANCE: A major obstacle to the identification of the neurobiological
correlates of schizophrenia is the substantial clinical heterogeneity present in 
this disorder. Dividing schizophrenia into "deficit" and "nondeficit" subtypes
may reduce heterogeneity and facilitate identification of neurobiological markers
of disease.
OBJECTIVE: To determine whether patients with deficit schizophrenia differ from
patients with nondeficit schizophrenia and healthy controls in neuroimaging-based
measures of white matter tracts and gray matter morphology.
DESIGN: A cross-sectional neuroimaging study of patients with the deficit or
nondeficit subtype of schizophrenia and healthy controls.
SETTING: University hospital.
PARTICIPANTS: Seventy-seven patients with schizophrenia and 79 healthy controls.
INTERVENTIONS: All participants were administered the Structured Clinical
Interview for DSM-IV-TR Axis I Disorders and the Positive and Negative Syndrome
Scale; IQ was measured using the Wechsler Test for Adult Reading; global
cognitive impairment was grossly assessed using the Mini-Mental State
Examination; comorbid physical illness burden was measured by administration of
the Clinical Information Rating Scale-Geriatrics; high-resolution magnetic
resonance imaging was performed as part of a multimodal imaging protocol; and
deficit status was determined using the proxy scale for the deficit syndrome.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Diffusion-based measures of white matter tracts, cortical 
thickness, cortical surface area, and volumes of subcortical structures.
RESULTS: In both an individually matched approach (18 patients with deficit
schizophrenia, 18 patients with nondeficit schizophrenia, and 18 healthy
controls) and an unmatched population-based approach (18 patients with deficit
schizophrenia, 59 patients with nondeficit schizophrenia, and 79 health
controls), the patients with deficit schizophrenia demonstrated disruption of
white matter tracts compared with patients with nondeficit schizophrenia and
healthy controls at the right inferior longitudinal fasciculus, the right arcuate
fasciculus, and the left uncinate fasciculus. These findings were supported in
patients with first-episode schizophrenia (n = 20) who had a deficit score that
was strongly correlated with disruption at these same tracts. In contrast,
patients with schizophrenia of either subtype exhibited cortical thickness
reductions compared with healthy controls, in near-identical neuroanatomic
patterns. Surface areas and subcortical volumes did not differ significantly
among the 3 groups.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: The convergence of findings in our individually
matched sample, our unmatched overall sample, and our first-episode schizophrenia
sample demonstrate (1) white matter tract disruption as a neurobiological feature
of the deficit syndrome and (2) reductions in cortical thickness as a common
feature of patients with a diagnosis of schizophrenia. When taken with previous
results in gray matter, our findings in white matter tracts point to neural
circuitry important for socioemotional function as a core neurobiological feature
of the deficit subtype of schizophrenia.

PMID: 23467781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Mol Psychiatry. 2013 Apr;18(4):443-50. doi: 10.1038/mp.2013.17. Epub 2013 Mar 5.

The genome-wide supported microRNA-137 variant predicts phenotypic heterogeneity 
within schizophrenia.

Lett TA(1), Chakravarty MM, Felsky D, Brandl EJ, Tiwari AK, Gonçalves VF, Rajji
TK, Daskalakis ZJ, Meltzer HY, Lieberman JA, Lerch JP, Mulsant BH, Kennedy JL,
Voineskos AN.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, ON, Canada [2] Institute of
Medical Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.

Erratum in
    Mol Psychiatry. 2013 Oct;18(10):1146. Chakavarty, M M [corrected to Chakravarty, 
M M].

We examined the influence of the genome-wide significant schizophrenia risk
variant rs1625579 near the microRNA (miRNA)-137 (MIR137) gene on well-established
sources of phenotypic variability in schizophrenia: age-at-onset of psychosis and
brain structure. We found that the MIR137 risk genotype strongly predicts an
earlier age-at-onset of psychosis across four independently collected samples of 
patients with schizophrenia (n=510; F1,506=17.7, P=3.1 × 10(-5)). In an
imaging-genetics subsample that included additional matched controls (n=213),
patients with schizophrenia who had the MIR137 risk genotype had reduced white
matter integrity (F3,209=13.6, P=3.88 × 10(-8)) throughout the brain as well as
smaller hippocampi and larger lateral ventricles; the brain structure of patients
who were carriers of the protective allele was no different from healthy control 
subjects on these neuroimaging measures. Our findings suggest that MIR137
substantially influences variation in phenotypes that are thought to have an
important role in clinical outcome and treatment response. Finally, the possible 
consequences of genetic risk factors may be distinct in patients with
schizophrenia compared with healthy controls.

PMID: 23459466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Neuroimage. 2013 Jul 1;74:254-65. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.02.003. Epub
2013 Feb 13.

A novel in vivo atlas of human hippocampal subfields using high-resolution 3 T
magnetic resonance imaging.

Winterburn JL(1), Pruessner JC, Chavez S, Schira MM, Lobaugh NJ, Voineskos AN,
Chakravarty MM.

Author information: 
(1)Kimel Family Translational Imaging Genetics Research Laboratory, Research
Imaging Centre, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, Canada.
winterburn.julie@gmail.com

The hippocampus is a neuroanatomical structure that has been widely studied in
the context of learning, memory, stress, and neurodegeneration.
Neuroanatomically, the hippocampus is subdivided into several subfields with
intricate morphologies and complex three-dimensional relationships. Recent
studies have demonstrated that the identification of different subfields is
possible with high-resolution and -contrast image volumes acquired using ex vivo 
specimens in a small bore 9.4 T scanner and, more recently, in vivo, at 7 T. In
these studies, the neuroanatomical definitions of boundaries between subfields
are based upon salient differences in image contrast. Typically, the definition
of subfields has not been possible using commonly available magnetic resonance
(MR) scanners (i.e.: 1.5 or 3T) due to resolution and contrast limitations. To
overcome the limited availability of post-mortem specimens and expertise in
state-of-the-art high-field imaging, we propose a coupling of MR acquisition and 
detailed segmentation techniques that allow for the reliable identification of
hippocampal anatomy (including subfields). High-resolution and -contrast T1- and 
T2-weighted image volumes were acquired from 5 volunteers (2 male; 3 female; age 
range: 29-57, avg. 37) using a clinical research-grade 3T scanner and have final 
super-sampled isotropic voxel dimensions of 0.3mm. We demonstrate that by using
these acquisition techniques, our data results in contrast-to-noise ratios that
compare well with high-resolution images acquired with long scan times using
post-mortem data at higher field strengths. For the subfields, the cornus ammonis
(CA) 1, CA2/CA3, CA4/dentate gyrus, stratum radiatum/stratum lacunosum/stratum
moleculare, and subiculum were all labeled as separate structures. Hippocampal
volumes are reported for each of the substructures and the hippocampus as a whole
(range for hippocampus: 2456.72-3325.02 mm(3)). Intra-rater reliability of our
manual segmentation protocol demonstrates high reliability for the whole
hippocampus (mean Dice Kappa of 0.91; range 0.90-0.92) and for each of the
subfields (range of Dice Kappas: 0.64-0.83). We demonstrate that our reliability 
is better than the Dice Kappas produced by simulating the following errors: a
translation by a single voxel in all cardinal directions and 1% volumetric
shrinkage and expansion. The completed hippocampal atlases are available freely
online (info2.camh.net/kf-tigr/index.php/Hippocampus) and can be coupled with
novel computational neuroanatomy techniques that will allow for them to be
customized to the unique neuroanatomy of different subjects, and ultimately be
utilized in different analysis pipelines.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23415948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2013 Feb;21(2):108-18. doi: 10.1016/j.jagp.2012.10.011. 
Epub 2013 Jan 22.

Cognitive performance of individuals with schizophrenia across seven decades: a
study using the MATRICS consensus cognitive battery.

Rajji TK(1), Voineskos AN, Butters MA, Miranda D, Arenovich T, Menon M, Ismail Z,
Kern RS, Mulsant BH.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, Canada.

OBJECTIVES: The objectives of this study were to determine the effect of aging,
schizophrenia, and their interaction on cognitive function.
DESIGN: Cross-sectional controlled study.
SETTING: Community living.
PARTICIPANTS: A total of 235 subjects with schizophrenia age 19-79 and 333
comparison subjects age 20-81.
MEASUREMENTS: The Measurement and Treatment Research to Improve Cognition in
Schizophrenia (MATRICS) Consensus Cognitive Battery (MCCB).
RESULTS: Older age was associated with poorer performance on 9 of 10 MCCB tests
in both subjects with schizophrenia and comparison subjects. Subjects with
schizophrenia were impaired relative to comparison subjects on each of the 10
tests. However, there was no interaction between aging and schizophrenia on any
test. Essentially the same results were observed when analyzing performance on
the seven MCCB cognitive domains and MCCB global composite score.
CONCLUSIONS: Consistent with other reports, schizophrenia appears to be a
disorder marked by generalized cognitive dysfunction. However, the rate of
cognitive decline appears to be similar to that observed in healthy comparison
subjects. They do not experience acceleration in cognitive aging, which supports 
the hypothesis that schizophrenia is a syndrome of premature aging. Longitudinal 
studies including very old patients are needed to confirm and extend these
findings.

Copyright © 2013 American Association for Geriatric Psychiatry. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3548068
PMID: 23343484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Biol Psychiatry. 2013 Mar 15;73(6):510-7. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2012.08.020.
Epub 2012 Oct 3.

Can repetitive magnetic stimulation improve cognition in schizophrenia? Pilot
data from a randomized controlled trial.

Barr MS(1), Farzan F, Rajji TK, Voineskos AN, Blumberger DM, Arenovich T,
Fitzgerald PB, Daskalakis ZJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Department of Psychiatry, University
of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Working memory represents a core cognitive domain that is impaired in
schizophrenia for which there are currently no satisfactory treatments.
Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) targeted over the
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex has been shown to modulate neurophysiological
mechanisms linked to working memory in schizophrenia and improves working memory 
performance in healthy subjects and might therefore represent a treatment
modality for schizophrenia patients. The objectives were to evaluate the effects 
of rTMS on working memory performance in schizophrenia patients and evaluate
whether rTMS normalizes performance to healthy subject levels.
METHODS: In a 4-week randomized double-blind sham-controlled pilot study design, 
27 medicated schizophrenia patients were tested at the Centre for Addiction and
Mental Health (a university teaching hospital that provides psychiatric care to a
large urban catchment area and serves as a tertiary referral center for the
province of Ontario). Patients performed the verbal working memory n-back task
before and after rTMS magnetic resonance image targeted bilaterally sequentially 
to left and right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex 750 pulses/side at 20 Hz for 20 
treatments. The main outcome measure was mean magnitude of change in the n-back
accuracy for target responses with active (n = 13) or sham (n = 12) rTMS
treatment course.
RESULTS: The rTMS significantly improved 3-back accuracy for targets compared
with placebo sham (Cohen's d = .92). The improvement in 3-back accuracy was also 
found to be at a level comparable to healthy subjects.
CONCLUSIONS: These pilot data suggest that bilateral rTMS might be a novel,
efficacious, and safe treatment for working memory deficits in patients with
schizophrenia.

Copyright © 2013 Society of Biological Psychiatry. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 23039931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Cortex. 2013 May;49(5):1377-85. doi: 10.1016/j.cortex.2012.06.003. Epub 2012 Jun 
23.

Inhibitory deficits in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in psychopathic
offenders.

Hoppenbrouwers SS(1), De Jesus DR, Stirpe T, Fitzgerald PB, Voineskos AN,
Schutter DJ, Daskalakis ZJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Psychology, Helmholtz Institute, Utrecht
University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Often typified as cunning social predators, psychopathic offenders show a
persistent pattern of impulsive and reckless behavior, the pathophysiology of
which has been related to dysfunction in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex
(DLPFC). That is, the DLPFC is important for the regulatory control of impulses
and emotion as well as working memory and psychopathic offenders show impairments
in all three dimensions. In the present study, we used combined transcranial
magnetic stimulation and electroencephalography to compare the physiology of the 
DLPFC in 13 psychopathic offenders and 15 healthy subjects vis à vis excitability
and inhibition. In addition, working memory performance was measured through the 
letter-number sequencing test. Results showed that compared to healthy subjects, 
psychopathic offenders had inhibition not excitability deficits in the DLPFC that
was accompanied by deficits in working memory performance. In healthy controls
and psychopathic offenders working memory performance correlated with the extent 
of inhibition over the DLPFC. Taken together, these findings suggest that
psychopathic offenders suffer from dysfunctional inhibitory neurotransmission in 
the DLPFC and impaired working memory which may account for the behavioral
impairments associated with this disorder.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22795183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Cereb Cortex. 2013 Sep;23(9):2044-57. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhs188. Epub 2012 Jul
6.

Oligodendrocyte genes, white matter tract integrity, and cognition in
schizophrenia.

Voineskos AN(1), Felsky D, Kovacevic N, Tiwari AK, Zai C, Chakravarty MM, Lobaugh
NJ, Shenton ME, Rajji TK, Miranda D, Pollock BG, Mulsant BH, McIntosh AR, Kennedy
JL.

Author information: 
(1)Kimel Family Translational Imaging-Genetics Laboratory, Research Imaging
Centre, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
aristotle_voineskos@camh.net

Oligodendrocyte genes and white matter tracts have been implicated in the
pathophysiology of schizophrenia and may play an important etiopathogenic role in
cognitive dysfunction in schizophrenia. The objective of the present study in 60 
chronic schizophrenia patients individually matched to 60 healthy controls was to
determine whether 1) white matter tract integrity influences cognitive
performance, 2) oligodendrocyte gene variants influence white matter tract
integrity and cognitive performance, and 3) effects of oligodendrocyte gene
variants on cognitive performance are mediated via white matter tract integrity. 
We used the partial least-squares multivariate approach to ascertain
relationships among oligodendrocyte gene variants, integrity of cortico-cortical 
and subcortico-cortical white matter tracts, and cognitive performance. Robust
relationships among oligodendrocyte gene variants, white matter tract integrity, 
and cognitive performance were found in both patients and controls. We also
showed that effects of gene variants on cognitive performance were mediated by
the integrity of white matter tracts. Our results were strengthened by
bioinformatic analyses of gene variant function. To our knowledge, this is the
first study that has brought together these lines of investigation in the same
population and highlights the importance of the oligodendrocyte/white matter
pathway in schizophrenia, particularly as it pertains to cognitive function.

PMCID: PMC3729194
PMID: 22772651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Schizophr Res. 2012 Aug;139(1-3):46-52. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2012.06.006. Epub
2012 Jun 22.

Cholinergic pathways and cognition in patients with schizophrenia: a pilot study.

Rajji TK(1), Chow TW, Voineskos AN, Links KA, Miranda D, Mamo DC, Ismail Z,
Pollock BG, Mulsant BH.

Author information: 
(1)Geriatric Mental Health Program, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health,
Toronto, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Cognitive deficits are core features in schizophrenia. Disruption in 
cholinergic neurotransmission has been associated with executive dysfunction in
animals and humans. The objective of this study was to evaluate the impact of
compromised cholinergic pathways on executive versus non-executive cognitive
functions of patients with schizophrenia.
METHODS: 62 patients with schizophrenia and 62 age- and sex-matched
non-psychiatric control subjects ("controls") were assessed and compared using:
clinical measures, cognitive measures of global cognition, executive function,
and memory; and an MRI-based visual rating scale that assesses damage
strategically localized within the cholinergic pathways.
RESULTS: 11 of the 62 patients with schizophrenia (17.7%) and 6 of the 62
controls (9.7%) had compromised cholinergic pathways. These proportions were not 
statistically significant. Patients and controls with compromised cholinergic
pathways were more impaired on measures related to executive function than
patients or controls without compromised pathways.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with schizophrenia have worse executive function than
controls. Compromised cholinergic pathways appear to worsen the executive
dysfunction observed in schizophrenia. If these preliminary findings are
replicated, they could lead to the identification of a subgroup of patients with 
schizophrenia who could specifically benefit from interventions enhancing
cholinergic neurotransmission.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22727706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Front Psychiatry. 2012 Jun 19;3:57. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2012.00057. eCollection
2012.

DISC1 and Striatal Volume: A Potential Risk Phenotype For mental Illness.

Chakravarty MM(1), Felsky D, Tampakeras M, Lerch JP, Mulsant BH, Kennedy JL,
Voineskos AN.

Author information: 
(1)Kimel Family Translational Imaging Genetics Research Laboratory, Research
Imaging Centre, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health Toronto, ON, Canada.

Disrupted-in-schizophrenia 1 was originally discovered in a large Scottish family
with abnormally high rates of severe mental illness, including schizophrenia,
bipolar disorder, and depression. An accumulating body of evidence from genetic, 
postmortem, and animal data supports a role for DISC1 in different forms of
mental illness. DISC1 may play an important role in determining structure and
function of several brain regions. One brain region of particular importance for 
several mental disorders is the striatum, and DISC1 mutant mice have demonstrated
an increase in dopamine (D2) receptors in this structure. However, association
between DISC1 functional polymorphisms and striatal structure have not been
examined in humans. We, therefore hypothesized that there would be a relationship
between human striatal volume and DISC1 genotype, specifically in the Leu607Phe
(rs6675281) and Ser704Cys (rs821618) single nucleotide polymorphisms. We tested
our hypothesis by automatically identifying the striatum in 54 healthy volunteers
recruited for this study. We also performed an exploratory analysis of cortical
thickness, cortical surface area, and structure volume. Our results demonstrate
that Phe allele carriers have larger striatal volume bilaterally (left striatum: 
p = 0.017; right striatum: p = 0.016). From the exploratory analyses we found
that the Phe carriers also had larger left hemisphere volumes (p = 0.0074) and
right occipital lobe surface area (p = 0.014) compared to LeuLeu homozygotes.
However, these exploratory findings do not survive a conservative correction for 
multiple comparisons. Our findings demonstrate that a functional DISC1 variant
influences striatal volumes. Taken together with animal data that this gene
influences D2 receptor levels in striatum, a key risk pathway for mental
illnesses such as schizophrenia and bipolar disorder may be conferred via DISC1's
effects on the striatum.

PMCID: PMC3378182
PMID: 22723785  [PubMed]


42. Front Psychiatry. 2012 May 3;3:40. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2012.00040. eCollection
2012.

Myelin-associated glycoprotein gene and brain morphometry in schizophrenia.

Felsky D(1), Voineskos AN, Lerch JP, Nazeri A, Shaikh SA, Rajji TK, Mulsant BH,
Kennedy JL.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Research Department, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health,
University of Toronto Toronto, ON, Canada.

Myelin and oligodendrocyte disruption may be a core feature of schizophrenia
pathophysiology. The purpose of the present study was to localize the effects of 
previously identified risk variants in the myelin-associated glycoprotein (MAG)
gene on brain morphometry in schizophrenia patients and healthy controls.
Forty-five schizophrenia patients and 47 matched healthy controls underwent
clinical, structural magnetic resonance imaging, and genetics procedures. Gray
and white matter cortical lobe volumes along with hippocampal volumes were
calculated from T1-weighted MRI scans. Each subject was also genotyped for the
two disease-associated MAG single nucleotide polymorphisms (rs720308 and
rs720309). Repeated measures general linear model (GLM) analysis found
significant region by genotype and region by genotype by diagnosis interactions
for the effects of MAG risk variants on lobar gray matter volumes. No significant
associations were found with lobar white matter volumes or hippocampal volumes.
Follow-up univariate GLMs found the AA genotype of rs720308 predisposed
schizophrenia patients to left temporal and parietal gray matter volume deficits.
These results suggest that the effects of the MAG gene on cortical gray matter
volume in schizophrenia patients can be localized to temporal and parietal
cortices. Our results support a role for MAG gene variation in brain morphometry 
in schizophrenia, align with other lines of evidence implicating MAG in
schizophrenia, and provide genetically based insight into the heterogeneity of
brain imaging findings in this disorder.

PMCID: PMC3342517
PMID: 22563322  [PubMed]


43. Schizophr Res. 2012 Feb;134(2-3):253-9. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2011.11.022. Epub
2011 Dec 21.

Hippocampal volume and the brain-derived neurotrophic factor Val66Met
polymorphism in first episode psychosis.

Smith GN(1), Thornton AE, Lang DJ, Macewan GW, Ehmann TS, Kopala LC, Tee K, Shiau
G, Voineskos AN, Kennedy JL, Honer WG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.
geoffsm@interchange.ubc.ca

INTRODUCTION: Small hippocampi and impaired memory are common in patients with
psychosis and brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) plays a critical role in
hippocampal neuroplasticity and memory. A common BDNF allele (Val66Met) has been 
the focus of numerous studies but results from the few BDNF-imaging studies are
complex and contradictory. The objective of this study was to determine the
association between Val66Met and hippocampal volume in patients with first
episode psychosis. Secondary analyses explored age-related associations and the
relationship between Val66Met and memory.
METHOD: Hippocampal volume and BDNF genotyping were obtained for 58 patients with
first-episode psychosis and 39 healthy volunteers. Patients were recruited from
an early psychosis program serving a catchment-area population.
RESULTS: Hippocampal volume was significantly smaller in patients than controls
(F(1,92)=4.03, p<0.05) and there was a significant group-by-allele interaction
(F(1,92)=3.99, p<0.05). Hippocampal volume was significantly smaller in patients 
than controls who were Val-homozygotes but no group differences were found for
Met carriers. Findings were not affected by diagnosis, antipsychotic medication, 
or age, and there was no change in hippocampal volume during a one-year
follow-up. Val-homozygous patients had worse immediate and delayed memory than
their Met counterparts.
CONCLUSIONS: Results suggest the effects of the BDNF Val66Met allele may be
different in patients with psychosis than in healthy adults. Hippocampal volume
in patient and control Met allele carriers was very similar suggesting that
illness-related factors have minimal influence in this group. In contrast, Val
homozygosity was related to smaller hippocampi and poorer memory functioning only
in patients with psychosis.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22192502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Neurobiol Aging. 2012 Jun;33(6):1124.e31-41. doi:
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2011.08.016. Epub 2011 Dec 14.

Localized hippocampus measures are associated with Alzheimer pathology and
cognition independent of total hippocampal volume.

Carmichael O(1), Xie J, Fletcher E, Singh B, DeCarli C; Alzheimer's Disease
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Collaborators: A S, Abdi H, Abdul Hadi N, Abdulkadir A, Abdullah A, Achuthan A,
Adluru N, Aggarwal N, Aghajanian J, Agyemang A, Ahdidan J, Ahmad D, Ahmed S,
Ahmed F, Ahmed F, Akbarifar R, Akhondi-Asl A, Aksu Y, Alcauter S, Daniel A, Alin 
A, Alshuft H, Alvarez-Linera J, Amin-Mansour A, Anderson D, Anderson J, Andorn A,
Ang A, Angersbach S, Ansarian R, Appaji A, Appannah A, Arfanakis K, Armentrout S,
Arrighi M, Arumughababu SV, Arunagiri V, Ashe-McNalley C, Ashford W, Aurelie le
P, Avants B, Aviv R, Avula R, Ayache N, Ayan-Oshodi M, Ayhan M, B V S, Babic T,
Bach Cuadra M, Bagepally B, Baird G, Baker J, Baker S, Bakker A,
Baladandayuthapani V, Barbash S, Barker W, Bartlett J, Bartley M, Baruchin A,
Battaglini I, Bauer C, Bayley P, Beck I, Becker J, Beckett L, Bednar M, Bedner A,
Beg MF, Bekris L, Belaroussi B, Belloch V, Ben Ahmed O, Bender JD, Bendib MM,
Benois-Pineau J, Bhagchandani S, Bienkowska K, Biffi A, Bilgic B, Bilgin G,
Billing B, Bishop C, Bittner D, Björnsdotter M, Black S, Bloss C, Blunck Y, Bocti
C, Bohorquez A, Bokde A, Boone J, Borrie M, Bourgeat P, Bouttout H, Bowman D,
Gene G, Boxer A, Bozoki A, Bracard S, Braskie M, Braunewell K, Breitner J,
Bresell A, Brewer J, Brickhouse M, Brickman A, Britschgi M, Broadbent S, Brock B,
Buchsbaum M, Buerger K, Bunce D, Burnham S, Burns J, Burzykowski T, Butler T,
Cabeza R, Cabral G, Caffery T, Cai Z, Callhoff J, Calvini P, Campbell N, Carbotti
A, Carle A, Carmasin C, Carmichael O, Carpenter C, Carvalho J, Casanova CR, Casey
A, David D, Cash D, Cataldo R, Cella M, Chakravarty M, Chang I, Chao L, Charil A,
Che-Wei C, Chen K, Chen S, Chen IJ, Chen JT, Chen R, Chen C, Chen Q, Chen H, Chen
J, Chen G, Cheng WC, Cheng X, Cheng B, Cherkas Y, Chertkow H, Cheung V, Chiang G,
Chiao P, Chibane MB, Chida N, Chin S, Ching C, Chisholm J, Cho C, Cho SS, Choe J,
Choubey S, Chowbina S, Ciocia G, Clark D, Clarkson M, Clerc S, Climer S, Clunie
D, Coen M, Coimbra A, Compton D, Coubard O, Coulin S, Coulson E, Cover KS, Crans 
G, Crawford K, Croop R, Crum W, Cui Y, Da L, Daiello L, Darby E, Darkner S,
Darnell R, Davatzikos C, DavidPrakash B, Davidson C, Davis M, de Bruijne M,
DeCarli C, Decker S, DeDuck K, Dehghan H, Della Rosa PA, DeOrchis V, Dépy Carron 
D, Desjardins B, deToledo-Morrell L, Devanand D, Devanarayan V, Devier D, Devous 
M, Di X, Di J, Diaz-Arrastia R, Diciotti S, Dickerson B, Dickie DA, Dickinson P, 
Dill V, Ding X, Dinov I, Dobosh B, Dobson H, Dodge H, Dolman A, Dolmo BC, Dong W,
Donohue M, Dore V, Dorflinger E, Dowling M, Dowling M, Dragicevic N, Dubal D,
Duchesne S, Duff K, Dukart J, Durazzo T, Dutta J, DWors R, Egefjord L,
Elcoroaristizabal X, Emahazion T, Emahazion T, Endres C, Epstein N, Ereshefsky L,
Eskildsen S, Espinosa E, Esposito M, Ewers M, Ewers M, Falcone G, Fan Z, Fan Y,
Fan J, Fang Z, Farahibozorg S, Farahmandpoor Z, Farb N, Fardo D, Farias S, Farnum
M, Farrer L, Fatke B, Faux N, Favilla S, Fazlollahi A, Feldman B, Félix Z,
Fennema-Notestine C, Fernandes M, Fernandez S, Fernandez E, Ferrer E, Fetterman
B, Figurski M, Fillit H, Finch S, Fiot JB, Flenniken D, Fletcher E, Flores C,
Flynn Longmire C, Focke N, Forsythe A, Foxhall S, Franko E, Freeman R, Freire R, 
Friedrich CM, Friesenhahn M, Giovanni G, Fritzsche K, Fujiwara K, Fullerton T,
Gaffour Y, Galvin B, Gamst A, Gan K, Gao S, Garg G, Gaser C, Gastineau E, Gattaz 
W, Gaubert M, Gaudreau A, Gauthier S, Ge T, Gemme G, Geraci J, Gholipour F, Ghosh
D, Ghosh S, Gieschke R, Gill R, Gillespie W, Gitelman D, Gkontra X, Gleason C,
Glymour MM, Godbey M, Gold B, Goldberg T, Goldman J, Gomar J, Gonzalez-Beltran A,
Gore C, Gorriz JM, Goto M, Gradkowski W, Grasela T, Gray K, Gregory E, Greicius
M, Grill J, Grolmusz V, Gross A, Gross A, Grydeland H, Guignot I, Guo H, Guo G,
Guo LH, Gupta V, Guyot J, Haas M, Habeck C, Habte F, Haight T, Hajaj C,
Hajiesmaeili M, Hajjar I, Hammarstrom P, Hampel H, Han Z, Han D, Hanna Y,
Hanna-Pladdy B, Hao Y, Hardy P, Harrison J, Harvey D, Harvey D, Hayashi T, Haynes
JD, He Y, He H, Head D, Heckemann R, Heegaard N, Heidebrink J, Hellyer P, Helwig 
M, Henderson D, Herholz K, Hess C, Hill S, Hisaka A, Ho Ming AY, Hobart J,
Hochstetler H, Hofer S, Hoffman J, Holder D, Hollingworth P, Holmes R, Hong H,
Hong H, Honigberg L, Hoogenraad F, Hope T, Hot P, hsieh H, Hsu A, Hu W, Hu X, Hu 
C, Hu M, Hua WY, Huang CC, Huang X, Huang J, Huang Y, Huang CJ, Huang Z,
Huentelman M, Huppertz HJ, Hurt S, Hussain M, Hutchins J, Hwang S, Hyun J,
Ifeachor E, Iglesias M, Ikonomidou V, Iman A, Imani F, Immermann F, Inlow M,
Inoue L, Insel P, Irizarry M, Ishibashi T, Ishii K, Ito K, Iwatsubo T, Jacks A,
Jacobson M, Jacqmin P, Jaeger M, Jagger R, Jagust W, Janousova E, Jara H, Jedynak
B, Jefferson A, Jenq J, Jiang T, Jiang C, Jiao Y, Jiaolong Q, Jin K, Johnson S,
Johnson J, Johnson K, Gareth G, Jones M, Jones R, Joshi R, Joshi S, Jouvent E,
Juengling F, Jung W, Junjie Z, K G M, Kabilan M, Kairui Z, Kam HJ, Kamer A,
Kanakaraj S, Kanchev V, Kaneko T, Kaneta T, Kang H, Kang JH, Kang J, Karantzoulis
S, Kaushik SS, Kauwe J, Kauwe J, Kawashima S, Kaye E, Kazemi S, Ke H, Kelleher T,
Kennedy R, Keogh B, Kerchner G, Kerr D, Keshava N, Khalil A, Khondker Z, Kiddle
S, Kihara T, Killeen N, Killiany R, Kim JH, Kim S, Kim D, Kim A, Kim JH, Kimberg 
D, King R, Kirby J, Kirsch W, Klein G, Klimas M, Kline R, Klopfenstein E, Koen J,
Koenig L, Koikkalainen J, Kokomoor A, Kong X, Kong X, Koppel J, Korolev I,
Krahnke T, Krams M, Kuceyeski A, Kuhl D, Kumar V, Roy PK, Kuo J, Kyrtsos CR,
Labib V, Labrish C, Lai S, Lakatos A, Lalonde F, Lam SC, Lam OK, Lampron A,
Landau S, Lane B, Langbaum J, Langford D, Lanius V, Lasch S, Latella M, Hiuyan H,
Leatherday C, Lee D, Lee G, Lee S, Lee Ja, Lemaitre H, Lenfant P, Leonards U,
Leong L, Leoutsakos JM, Leung K, Leung YY, Levey A, Li M, Li J, Li X, Li L, Li Y,
Li Q, Li R, Li Y, Li J, Li Y, Li J, Li W, Li X, Liang P, Liang K, Liang K, Liao
W, Liao S, Liaquat S, Liaw C, Liberman G, Lilley P, Lin F, Lin X, Lin AL, Liu T, 
Liu Y, Liu Y, Liu L, Liu W, Liu C, Liu M, Liu X, Liu T, Liu T, Liu Y, Liu T, Liu 
X, Liu Y, Liu Y, Liu D, Liu D, Liu S, Liu G, Llido J, Lo R, Lobach I, Lobanov V, 
Lockhart A, Long Z, Long X, Long M, Looi J, Lu H, Lu Y, Lu PH, Lucena N, Luis J, 
Lukas C, Lukic A, Luo X, Luo X, Luo L, Luo W, Ma SL, Ma SM, Mackin S, Mada M,
Madabhushi A, Madeira S, Magland J, Mahanta MS, Maikusa N, Maldjian J, Mandal I, 
Mang M, Manjon J, Mantri N, Manzour A, Marcus D, Margolin R, Marrett S, Marshall 
G, Martinez Gonzalez A, Martinez Torteya A, Martins R, Mather M, Mathis C, Matoug
S, Mattei P, Matthews D, Mattis P, McCarroll S, McEvoy L, McGeown W, McGinnis S, 
McGonigle J, McIntosh AR, McIntyre J, McLaren M, McMillan C, McQuail J,
Meadowcroft M, Meda S, Melie-Garcia L, Melrose R, Mendelson A, Mendez M, Menendez
M, Meng M, Meng M, Meredith J, Meyer C, Mez J, Mickael G, Mikula M, Miller M,
Colleen C, Mintun M, Mistridis P, Mitchell M, Mitsis E, Mon M, Moore D, Morabito 
MC, Moradi Birgani P, Moratal D, Morimoto B, Mormino E, Morris J, Morris J,
Mortamet B, Moscato P, Mourao-Miranda J, Mueller S, Mueller K, Mukherjee S,
Mukund N, Mulder E, Mungas D, Munir K, Murayama S, N S, Nagata K, Nair A,
Nasrabadi S, Nativio R, Nazeri A, Nejad L, Nekooei S, Nemeth I, Nencka A,
Nettiksimmons J, Neu S, Ng YB, Nguyen N, Nguyen H, Nichols T, Nicodemus K, Niecko
T, Nielsen C, Niethammer M, Nishio T, Nordstrom M, Noshad S, Notomi K, Novak N,
Nutakki GC, O'Charoen S, Obisesan T, Oh J, Okonkwo O, Olde Rikkert M, Oliveira J,
Oliveira A, Oliver R, Olmos S, Oltra J, Ong R, Ortner M, Osadebey M, Osadebey M, 
Ostrowitzki S, Ovando Vazquez CM, Overholser R, P A, P K A C, Pa J, Pa J,
Palanisamy P, Pan G, Pan Z, Pan S, Pande Y, Pardo J, Pardoe H, Park S, Park L,
Park MH, Park H, Parker C, Patel Y, Patil A, Patil M, Pawlak M, Pierre P, Pell G,
Pennec X, Pereira F, Perlbarg V, Perneczky R, Peters F, Petitti D, Petrella J,
Petrou M, Peyrat JM, Ngoc PT, Phillips J, Phillips N, Pian WT, Pierson R,
Piovezan M, Pipitone J, Pirraglia E, Planes X, Podhorski A, Poirier J, Pomara N, 
Popov V, Poppenk J, Potkin S, Potter G, Poulin S, Prastawa M, Prince J, Pruessner
J, Qiu W, Qu A, Qualls CD, Quarg P, Quinlan J, Rabbia M, Rajagovindan R, Rajeesh 
R, Ramadubramani V, Ramage A, Ramirez A, Randolph C, Rao H, Rao A, Reed B, Reid
A, Reilhac A, Reiner P, Reinsberger C, Retico A, Rhatigan L, Rhinn H, Rhoades E, 
Ribbens A, Richard E, Richards J, Richter M, Riddle W, Ridgway G, Ringman J,
Rizk-Jackson A, Rizzi M, Rodriguez L, Rodriguez-Vieitez E, Rogalski E, Rojas
Balderrama J, Rokicki J, Romero K, Rorden C, Jonathan J, Rosen O, Rostant O,
Rousseau F, Rubright J, Rucinski M, Ruiz A, Rulseh A, Rusinek H, Ryan L, Sabuncu 
M, Saculva M, Sahuquillo J, Said Y, Saito N, Sakata M, Salama M, Salazar D, Saman
S, Sanchez L, Sanders E, Sankar T, Santhamma S, Sarnel H, Sarwinda D, Sasaki T,
Sasaya T, Sato H, Sattlecker M, Savio A, Saykin A, Scanlon B, Scharre D,
Schegerin M, Schmand B, Schmansky N, Schmidt-Wilcke T, Schramm H, Schuerch M,
Schwartz P, Schwartz E, Adam A, Schwarz J, Schweizer T, Selnes P, Sembritzki K,
Senjem M, Sfikas G, Sghedoni R, Shah JH, Shahbaba B, Shams S, Shankle W, Shattuck
D, Shaw L, Shen Q, Shen J, Shen Q, Shera D, Sherva R, Shi Y, Shi F, Shi Y, Shi J,
Shilaskar S, Shinohara R, Shokouhi S, Shulman J, Sideris K, Siegel R, Silveira M,
Silverman D, Simak A, Simmons A, Simoes R, Simon H, Simon A, Simpson I, Singh N, 
Sinha N, Siuciak J, Sjögren N, Skinner J, Skudlarski S, Smith M, Smith C, Peter
P, Soares H, Soldan A, Soldea O, Solomon P, Solomon A, Som S, Song Z, Song S,
Sosova I, Soydemir M, Spampinato MV, Speier W, Sperling R, Spiegel R, Spies L,
Springate B, Spychalla A, Staff R, Steenland N, Steffener J, Stern Y, Stokman H, 
Stolzenberg E, Stricker N, Stühler E, Su S, Suen S, Sugishita M, Suk HI, Sukkar
R, Sullivan S, Sun M, Sun J, Sun Y, Sun J, Sun Y, Sundell K, Sutphen C, Svetnik
V, Swan M, Symons S, Szafranska K, Szigeti K, Szoeke C, Sørensen L, T G, Takeuchi
T, Tanaka S, Tanaka R, Tanchi C, Tancredi D, Tang Q, Tanzi R, Tarnow E, Tartaglia
MC, Tarver E, Tassy D, Tauber D, Taylor-Reinwald L, Teipel S, Teng E, Termenon M,
Terriza F, Thambisetty M, Thames A, Thatavarti RS, Thiele F, Thomas R, Thomas C, 
Thomas B, Thompson P, Thompson W, Thompson P, Thompson W, Thornton-Wells T,
Thorvaldsson V, Tokuda T, Toledo J, Toma A, Tomita N, Toro R, Torrealdea P,
Toschi N, Tosto G, Toussaint P, Toyoshiba H, Tractenberg R, Triggs T, Trittschuh 
E, Trotta G, Truong Huu T, Truran D, Tsalikakis D, Tsanas A, Tsang C, Tufail A,
Tung J, Turken A, Turner R, Tyagi P, Ueda Y, Uematsu D, Ullrich L, Umar N, Ungar 
L, Valenzuela O, Van de Nes J, van der Brug M, van der Lijn F, Van Hecke W, Van
Horn J, Van Leemput K, Van Train K, Varkuti B, Vasanawala M, Veeraraghavan H,
Vellay S, Vemuri P, Verma M, Vidoni E, Louis L, Vinyes G, Visser PJ, Vitek M,
Vogel S, Voineskos A, Vos S, Vounou M, Wade S, Walsh A, Wang Z, Wang A, Wang L,
Wang Y, Wang T, Wang Z, Wang LS, Wang X, Wang Z, Wang T, Wang YM, Wang S, Wang L,
Wang L, Wang S, Wang J, Ward M, Ward A, Watson D, Wefel J, Weiner M, Wenzel F,
Wesnes K, Shawn S, Westlye LT, Wheland D, Whitcher B, White B, Whitlow C,
Wilhelmsen K, Beth B, Wilson L, Wingo T, Wirth M, Wishart H, Wiste H, Wittemer E,
Wolf H, Wolke I, Wolz R, Wong K, Woo E, Woo J, Woods L, Worth A, Wu X, Wu Y, Wu
L, Wu E, Wyman B, Xie S, Xu Y, Xu YZ, Xu S, Xu J, Xu S, Yamada T, Yamashita F,
Yan Y, Yang Z, Yang HD, Yang E, Yang CY, Yang W, Yang H, Yang E, Yassa M,
Yavorsky C, Ye BS, Yee L, Yokoyama J, Yokoyama T, Stewart S, Younhyun J, Yu CQ,
Yu P, Yuan Y, Yuen B, Yushkevich P, Zaborszky L, Zagorodnov V, Zahodne L, Zarei
M, Zeimpekis K, Zeitzer J, Zelinski E, Zeskind B, Zhan X, Zhang T, Zhang Z, Zhang
X, Zhang Y, Zhang J, Zhang D, Zhang L, Zhang K, Zhang L, Zhang Z, Zhang P, Zhao
P, Zhou L, Zhou Y, Zhou B, Zhu X, Zhu H, Zhu L, Zhu Z, Ziegler G, Zilka S,
Zisserman A, Zito G, Zu Z, Zulfigar A.

Hippocampal injury in the Alzheimer's disease (AD) pathological process is
region-specific and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)-based measures of localized 
hippocampus (HP) atrophy are known to detect region-specific changes associated
with clinical AD, but it is unclear whether these measures provide information
that is independent of that already provided by measures of total HP volume.
Therefore, this study assessed the strength of association between localized HP
atrophy measures and AD-related measures including cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
amyloid beta and tau concentrations, and cognitive performance, in statistical
models that also included total HP volume as a covariate. A computational
technique termed localized components analysis (LoCA) was used to identify 7
independent patterns of HP atrophy among 390 semiautomatically delineated HP from
baseline magnetic resonance imaging of participants in the Alzheimer's Disease
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI). Among cognitively normal participants, multiple
measures of localized HP atrophy were significantly associated with CSF amyloid
concentration, while total HP volume was not. In addition, among all
participants, localized HP atrophy measures and total HP volume were both
independently and additively associated with CSF tau concentration, performance
on numerous neuropsychological tests, and discrimination between normal, mild
cognitive impairment (MCI), and AD clinical diagnostic groups. Together, these
results suggest that regional measures of hippocampal atrophy provided by
localized components analysis may be more sensitive than total HP volume to the
effects of AD pathology burden among cognitively normal individuals and may
provide information about HP regions whose deficits may have especially profound 
cognitive consequences throughout the AD clinical course.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3323681
PMID: 22169204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. PLoS One. 2011;6(11):e28044. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0028044. Epub 2011 Nov 23.

Impaired structural connectivity of socio-emotional circuits in autism spectrum
disorders: a diffusion tensor imaging study.

Ameis SH(1), Fan J, Rockel C, Voineskos AN, Lobaugh NJ, Soorya L, Wang AT,
Hollander E, Anagnostou E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, The Hospital for Sick Children, University of
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Abnormal white matter development may disrupt integration within
neural circuits, causing particular impairments in higher-order behaviours. In
autism spectrum disorders (ASDs), white matter alterations may contribute to
characteristic deficits in complex socio-emotional and communication domains.
Here, we used diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) and tract based spatial statistics
(TBSS) to evaluate white matter microstructure in ASD.
METHODS/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: DTI scans were acquired for 19 children and
adolescents with ASD (∼8-18 years; mean 12.4±3.1) and 16 age and IQ matched
controls (∼8-18 years; mean 12.3±3.6) on a 3T MRI system. DTI values for
fractional anisotropy, mean diffusivity, radial diffusivity and axial
diffusivity, were measured. Age by group interactions for global and voxel-wise
white matter indices were examined. Voxel-wise analyses comparing ASD with
controls in: (i) the full cohort (ii), children only (≤12 yrs.), and (iii)
adolescents only (>12 yrs.) were performed, followed by tract-specific
comparisons. Significant age-by-group interactions on global DTI indices were
found for all three diffusivity measures, but not for fractional anisotropy.
Voxel-wise analyses revealed prominent diffusion measure differences in ASD
children but not adolescents, when compared to healthy controls. Widespread
increases in mean and radial diffusivity in ASD children were prominent in
frontal white matter voxels. Follow-up tract-specific analyses highlighted
disruption to pathways integrating frontal, temporal, and occipital structures
involved in socio-emotional processing.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our findings highlight disruption of neural circuitry
in ASD, particularly in those white matter tracts that integrate the complex
socio-emotional processing that is impaired in this disorder.

PMCID: PMC3223195
PMID: 22132206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Neuroimage. 2012 Feb 1;59(3):2155-66. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.10.014. Epub
2011 Oct 14.

Detecting global and local hippocampal shape changes in Alzheimer's disease using
statistical shape models.

Shen KK(1), Fripp J, Mériaudeau F, Chételat G, Salvado O, Bourgeat P; Alzheimer's
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Collaborators: Saradha A, Abdi H, Abdulkadir A, Acharya D, Achuthan A, Adluru N, 
Aghajanian J, Agrusti A, Agyemang A, Ahdidan J, Ahmad D, Ahmed S, Aisen P,
Akhondi-Asl A, Aksu Y, Alberca R, Alcauter S, Alexander D, Alin A, Almeida F,
Alvarez-Lineara J, Amlien I, Anand S, Anderson D, Ang A, Angersbach S, Ansarian
R, Aoyama E, Appannah A, Arfanakis K, Armor T, Arrighi M, Arumughababu Sv,
Arunagiri V, Ashe-McNalley C, Ashford W, Le Page A, Avants B, Aviv R, Awasthi S, 
Ayache N, Ayan-Oshodi M, Ayhan M, Sumana BV, Babic T, Baek Y, Bagepally B, Baird 
G, Baker J, Baker S, Bakker A, Barbash S, Bard J, Barker W, Bartlett J, Baruchin 
A, Battaglini I, Bauer C, Bayley P, Beck I, Becker J, Becker JA, Beckett L,
Bednar M, Bedner A, Beg MF, Bekris L, Belaroussi B, Belloch V, Belmokhtar N, ben 
Ahmed O, Bender JD, Benois-Pineau J, Bhaskar U, Bienkowska K, Biffi A, Bigler E, 
Bilgic B, Bishop C, Bittner D, Black S, Bloss C, Bocti C, Bohorquez A, Bokde A,
Boone J, Boppana M, Borrie M, Bourgeat P, Bouttout H, Bowes M, Bowman D, Bowman
G, Bracard S, Braskie M, Braunewell K, Breitner J, Bresell A, Brewer J,
Brickhouse M, Brickman A, Britschgi M, Broadbent S, Brogren J, Brunton S,
Buchsbaum M, Buckley C, Buerger K, Bunce D, Burnham S, Burns J, Burton D,
Burzykowski T, Butler T, Cabeza R, Caffery T, Cairns N, Callhoff J, Calvini P,
Carbotti A, Carle A, Carmasin J, Carmichael O, Carvalho J, Casabianca J, Casanova
R, Casey A, Cash D, Cataldo R, Cedarbaum J, Cella M, Celsis P, Chakravarty M,
Chang I, Chao L, Charil A, Chang CW, Chemali Z, Chen K, Chen S, Chen R, Chen Q,
Chen JT, Chen G, Chen J, Chen W, Cheng WC, Cheng X, Cherkas Y, Chertkow H, Cheung
V, Cheung C, Chiang G, Chiao P, Chibane MB, Chida N, Chin S, Ching C, Chisholm J,
Cho C, Cho Y, Choe J, Choubey S, Chowbina S, Christensen AL, Ciocia G, Clark D,
Clark C, Clarkson M, Clerc S, Clunie D, Coen M, Ciombra A, Compton D, Coppola G, 
Coubard O, Coulin S, Cover KS, Crane P, Crans G, Croop R, Crowther D, Crum W, Cui
Y, Curry C, Cutter G, Da L, Daliri MR, Damato VD, Darby E, Darkner S, Davatzikos 
C, DavidPrakash B, Davidson C, Davis M, de Bruijne M, De Meyer G, De Nunzio G,
DeCarli C, Dechairo B, DeDuck K, Dehghan H, Delfino M, Della Rosa PA, Dellavedova
L, Delpassand E, Delrieu J, DeOrchis V, Dépy Carron D, Desjardins B,
deToledo-Morrell L, Devanand D, Devanarayan V, Devier D, Devous M, Dgetluck N, Di
J, Di X, Diaz-Arrastia R, Dickerson B, Dickie DA, Dill V, Ding X, Dinov I, Dobosh
B, Dobson H, Dodge H, Dolman A, Dolmo BC, Donohue M, Dore V, Dorflinger E,
Dowling M, Dragicevic N, Dubal D, Duchesne S, Duff K, Dukart J, Durazzo T, Dutta 
J, DWors R, Earl N, Edula G, Elcoroaristizabal X, Emahazion T, Endres C, Epstein 
N, Ereshefsky L, Eskildsen S, Espinosa A, Esposito M, Ewers M, Falcone G, Fan Y, 
Fan J, Fan L, Farahibozorg S, Farb N, Fardo D, Farias S, Farnum M, Farrer L,
Fatke B, Faux N, Feldman H, Feldman S, Feldman B, Félix Z, Fennema-Notestine C,
Fernandes M, Fernandez E, Ferreira MJ, Ferrer E, Fetterman B, Figurski M, Fillit 
H, Finch S, Fiot JB, Flenniken D, Fletcher E, Flores C, Longmire CF, Focke N,
Forman M, Forsythe A, Fox S, Fox-Bosetti S, Foxhall S, Franko E, Freeman R,
Friedrich CM, Friesenhahn M, Frisoni G, Fritzsche K, Fujimoto Y, Fujiwara K,
Fullerton T, Gaffour Y, Galvin B, Gamst A, Gao S, Garg G, Gaser C, Gastineau E,
Gattaz W, Gaubert M, Gauthier S, Gavett B, Ge T, Gemme G, Geraci J, Gholipour F, 
Ghosh D, Ghosh S, Gieschke R, Gill R, Gillespie W, Gitelman D, Gkontra X, Gleason
C, Glymour MM, Godbey M, Gold B, Goldberg T, Goldman J, Gonzalez-Beltran A,
Goodro R, Gore C, Gorriz JM, Goto M, Grachev I, Gradkowski W, Grandey E, Grasela 
T, Gray K, Greenberg B, Greicius M, Grill J, Gross A, Gross A, Grydeland H,
Guignot I, Guo Q, Guo LH, Guo H, Gupta V, Guyot J, Habeck C, Habte F, Haight T,
Hajaj C, Hajiesmaeili M, Hajjar I, Hammarstrom P, Hampel H, Han D, Han J, Han Z, 
Hanna Y, Hao Y, Hardy P, Harvey D, Hasan MK, Hayashi T, Haynes JD, He H, He Y,
Head D, Heckemann R, Heegaard N, Heidebrink J, Hellyer P, Helwig M, Henderson D, 
Herholz K, Herskovits AZ, Hess C, Hildenbrand M, Ming AY, Hobart J, Hochstetler
H, Hofer S, Hoffman J, Holder D, Hollingworth P, Holmes R, Hong Q, Honigberg L,
Hope T, Hoppin J, Hot P, Hou Y, Hsieh H, Hsu A, Hu X, Hu M, Hu W, Hua WY, Huang
S, Huang F, Huang Z, Huang CJ, Huang CC, Huang J, Hubbard R, Huentelman M,
Huppertz HJ, Hurko O, Hurt S, Hutchins J, Hwang S, Hyun J, Ifeachor E, Iglesias
M, Ikari Y, Ikonomidou V, Iman A, Imani F, Immermann F, Inlow M, Inoue L, Insel
P, Irizarry M, Ishibashi T, Ishii K, Ismail S, Ito K, Iturria-Medina Y, Iwatsubo 
T, Jacks A, Jacobson M, Jacqmin P, Jaffe C, Jagust W, Janousova E, Jara H,
Jasperse B, Jedynak B, Jefferson A, Jennings JR, Jenq J, Jessen W, Jia F, Jiang
T, Jiao Y, Jing H, Johnson K, Johnson S, Johnson DK, Johnson J, Jones G, Jones M,
Jones R, Joshi S, Jouvent E, Juengling F, Julin P, Junjie Z, Kabilan M, Kadish B,
Kairui Z, Kam HJ, Kamboh MI, Kamer A, Kanakaraj S, Kanchev V, Kaneko T, Kaneta T,
Kang H, Kang JH, Kang J, Karageorgiou E, Karantzoulis S, Karlawish J, Katz E,
Kaushik SS, Kauwe J, Kawakami H, Kawashima S, Kaye E, Kazemi S, Ke H, Kelleher T,
Kennedy R, Keogh B, Kerchner G, Kerr D, Keshava N, Khalil I, Khalil A, Khondker
Z, Kihara T, Killeen N, Killiany R, Kim D, Kim H, Kim S, Kim JH, Kim A, Kim JH,
Kimberg D, Kimura T, King R, Kirby J, Kirsch W, Klimas M, Kline R, Kling M,
Klopfenstein E, Koen J, Koikkalainen J, Kokomoor A, Kong X, Koppel J, Korolev I, 
Kotran N, Kowalczyk A, Krahnke T, Krams M, Kuceyeski A, Kuhl D, Kumar V, Roy PK, 
Kuo J, Labrish C, Lai S, Lakatos A, Lalonde F, Lam OK, Lampron A, Landau S, Lane 
R, Lane B, Langbaum J, Langford D, Lanius V, Latella M, Leahy R, an Lee J, Lee D,
Lee N, Lee S, Lee D, Lee G, Lefkimmiatis S, Lemaitre H, Lenfant P, Lenz R, Leong 
J, Leoutsakos JM, Leung YY, Levey A, Li R, Li X, Li W, Li X, Li M, Li L, Li J, Li
G, Li Q, Li Y, Li J, Li J, Li Y, Li S, Liang K, Liang K, Liang P, Liang L, Liao
W, Liaquat S, Liberman G, Lin L, Lin AL, Lin F, Liu T, Liu D, Liu L, Liu H, Liu
S, Liu T, Liu X, Liu S, Liu L, Liu W, Liu G, Liu T, Liu Y, Liu C, Lo R, Lobanov
V, Lockhart A, Loewenstein D, Logovinsky V, Long M, Long Z, Long X, Looi J, Lu H,
Lu PH, Lucena N, Lukas C, Lukic A, Luo L, Luo X, Luo X, Lynch J, Ma SM, Mackin S,
Mada M, Madabhushi A, Maglio S, Mahanta MS, Maikusa N, Maldjian J, Mandal I,
Manjon J, Mantri N, Manzour A, Marchewka A, Marcus D, Margolin R, Marrett S,
Marshall G, Gonzalez AM, Torteya AM, Mather M, Mathis C, Mattei P, Matthews D,
McArdle J, McCarroll S, McEvoy L, McGeown W, McGinnis S, McGonigle J, McIntyre J,
McLaren D, McQuail J, Meadowcroft M, Meda S, Melie-Garcia L, Melrose R, Mendelson
A, Mendez M, Menendez E, Meng M, Meredith J, Metti A, Meyer C, Mez J, Mickael G, 
Miftahof R, Mikula M, Miller M, Millikin C, Mintun M, Mirza M, Mistridis P,
Mitchell M, Mitsis E, Mon A, Moore D, Morabito FC, Birgani PM, Moratal D,
Morimoto B, Mormino E, Morris J, Mortamet B, Moscato P, Mueller K, Mueller S,
Mukherjee S, Mulder E, Mungas D, Munir K, Murayama S, Murphy M, Myers A, Sairam
N, Nagata K, Nair A, Nativio R, Nazarparvar B, Nazeri A, Nejad L, Nekooei S,
Nettiksimmons J, Neu S, Ng YB, Nguyen N, Nichols T, Nicodemus K, Niecko T,
Nielsen C, Nishio T, Nordstrom M, Noshad S, Notomi K, Novak N, Nutakki GC,
O'Bryant S, Obisesan T, Oh J, Okonkwo O, Olde Rikkert M, Oliveira A, Oliveira J, 
Oliver R, Olmos S, Oltra J, Ortner M, Osadebey M, Ostrowitzki S, Overholser R,
Anishiya P, Chitra PK, Pa J, Palanisamy P, Pan S, Pan Z, Pande Y, Pardo J, Pardoe
H, Park Sh, Park S, Park L, Park H, Park MH, Parker C, Patel Y, Patil A, Patil M,
Pawlak M, Payoux P, Pearson J, Pell G, Peng Y, Pennec X, Pepin Jl, Pereira F,
Perneczky R, Petitti D, Petrella J, Peyrat JM, Ngoc PT, Phillips J, Phillips N,
Pian WT, Pierson R, Piovezan M, Pipitone J, Pirraglia E, Planes X, Podhorski A,
Pollari M, Pomara N, Pontecorvo M, Popov V, Poppenk J, Posner H, Potkin S, Potter
G, Potter E, Poulin S, Prastawa M, Prince J, Priya A, Pruessner J, Qiu W, Qu A,
Qualls CD, Quarg P, Quinlan J, Rabbia M, Rajagovindan R, Rajeesh R, Rallabandi
VP, Ramadubramani V, Ramage A, Ramirez A, Randolph C, Rao A, Rao H, Rao D,
Raubertas R, Ray D, Razak H, Reed B, Reid A, Reihac A, Reiner P, Reinsberger C,
Restrepo L, Retico A, Rhatigan L, Rhinn H, Rhoades E, Ribbens A, Richard E,
Richards J, Richter M, Riddle W, Ridgway G, Ries M, Ringman J, Rischall M,
Rizk-Jackson A, Rizzi M, Robieson W, Rodriguez L, Rodriguez-Vieitez E, Rogalski
E, Rogers E, Balderrama JR, Rokicki J, Romero K, Rorden C, Rosand J, Rosen O,
Rosenberg P, Roubini E, Rousseau F, Rowe C, Rubin D, Rubright J, Rucinski M, Ruiz
A, Rulseh A, Rusinek H, Ryan L, Saad A, Sabuncu M, Sahuquillo J, Said Y, Saito N,
Sakata M, Salama M, Salazar D, Salter H, Saman S, Sanchez L, Sanders E, Sankar T,
Santhamma S, Sarnel H, Sasaki T, Sasaya T, Sato H, Sattlecker M, Saumier D, Savio
A, Saykin A, Scanlon B, Scharre D, Schegerin M, Schmand B, Schmansky N,
Schmidt-Wilcke T, Schramm H, Schuerch M, Schwartz C, Schwartz E, Schwarz A,
Schwarz J, Selnes P, Sembritzki K, Senjem M, Sevigny J, Sfikas G, Sghedoni R,
Shah SK, Shahbaba B, Shams S, Shankle W, Shattuck D, Shaw L, Sheela J, Shen J,
Shen Q, Shen W, Shen Q, Shera D, Sherman J, Sherva R, Shi J, Shi Y, Shi F,
Shokouhi S, Shukla V, Shulman J, Sideris K, Siegel R, Silveira M, Silverman D,
Sim I, Simak A, Simmons A, Simoes R, Simon A, Simon M, Simpson I, Singh N, Singh 
SP, Sinha N, Siuciak J, Sjögren N, Skinner J, Smith M, Smith C, Smyth T, Snow S, 
Snyder P, Soares H, Soldan A, Soldea O, Solomon A, Solomon P, Som S, Song Z, Song
S, Sosova I, Soydemir M, Spampinato MV, Speier W, Sperling R, Renãâ S, Spies L,
Springate B, Staff R, Steffener J, Stern Y, Stokman H, Straw J, Stricker N,
Stühler E, Styren S, Subramanian V, Suen S, Sugishita M, Sukkar R, Sun Y, Sun J, 
Sun Y, Sundell K, Suzuki A, Svetnik V, Swan M, Symons S, Szigeti K, Szoeke C,
Sørensen L, Genish T, Takahasi T, Takeuchi T, Tanaka S, Tanaka R, Tanchi C,
Tancredi D, Tang Q, Tarnow E, Tartaglia MC, Tarver E, Tassy D, Tauber C,
Taylor-Reinwald L, Teipel S, Teng E, Terriza F, Thambisetty M, Thames A,
Thatavarti RS, Thiele F, Thomas C, Thomas R, Thomas B, Thompson P, Thompson W,
Thornton-Wells T, Thorvaldsson V, Thurfjell L, Tokuda T, Toledo JB, Tölli T, Toma
A, Tomita N, Toro R, Torrealdea P, Tosto G, Tosun D, Tousian M, Toussaint P,
Toyoshiba H, Tractenberg RE, Triggs T, Trittschuh E, Trojanowski J, Trotta G, Huu
TT, Truran D, Tsanas A, Tsang C, Tufail A, Tung J, Turken A, Ueda Y, Uematsu D,
Ullrich L, Venkataraju KU, Umar N, Ungar L, Uzunbas G, Van de Nes J, van der Brug
M, van der Lijn F, Van Hecke W, Van Horn J, Van Leemput K, Van Train K, Varkuti
B, Vasanawala M, Veeraraghavan H, Vemuri P, Verma M, Videbaek C, Vidoni E,
Villanueva-Meyer J, Vinyes G, Visser PJ, Vitek M, Vogel S, Voineskos A, Vos S,
Vounou M, Wade S, Walsh A, Wan H, Wang T, Wang YM, Wang W, Wang A, Wang S, Wang
L, Wang L, Wang Y, Wang LS, Wang L, Wang A, Wang Y, Wang X, Wang Z, Wang T, Ward 
M, Ward A, Watanabe T, Watson D, Webb D, Wefel J, Weiner M, Westlye LT, Wheland
D, Whitcher B, White B, Whitlow C, Wilhelmsen K, Wilmot B, Wilson L, Wimsatt M,
Wingo T, Wirth M, Wishart H, Wiste H, Wolf H, Wolke I, Wolz R, Wong K, Woo J, Woo
E, Woods L, Worth A, Wu Y, Wu L, Wu E, Wyman B, Xiao G, Xie S, Xu Y, Xu YZ, Xu G,
Xu S, Xu S, Xu J, Yamada T, Yamashita F, Yan Y, Yan P, Yan Y, Yang CY, Yang Z,
Yang E, Yang G, Yang W, Yang E, Yank HD, Yang J, Yassa M, Yavorsky C, Ye BS, Ye
L, Ye J, Yee L, Ying S, Yokoyama T, Young S, Young J, Younhyun J, Yu D, Yu S, Yu 
CQ, Yu P, Yuan Y, Yuan K, Yuan G, Yuen B, Yushkevich P, Zaborszky L, Zagorodnov
V, Zagorski M, Zahodne L, Zarei M, Zawadzki R, Zeitzer J, Zelinski E, Zeskind B, 
Zhan S, Zhang J, Zhang L, Zhang Z, Zhang L, Zhang Z, Zhang D, Zhang H, Zhang X,
Zhang T, Zhang P, Zhao J, Zhao Q, Zhao P, Zhen X, Zhijun Y, Zhou L, Zhou B, Zhou 
Y, Zhou S, Zhu H, Zhu W, Zhu W, Zhu X, Ziegler G, Zilka S, Zisserman A, Zito G,
Zu C, Zulfigar A.

The hippocampus is affected at an early stage in the development of Alzheimer's
disease (AD). With the use of structural magnetic resonance (MR) imaging, we can 
investigate the effect of AD on the morphology of the hippocampus. The
hippocampal shape variations among a population can be usually described using
statistical shape models (SSMs). Conventional SSMs model the modes of variations 
among the population via principal component analysis (PCA). Although these modes
are representative of variations within the training data, they are not
necessarily discriminative on labeled data or relevant to the differences between
the subpopulations. We use the shape descriptors from SSM as features to classify
AD from normal control (NC) cases. In this study, a Hotelling's T2 test is
performed to select a subset of landmarks which are used in PCA. The resulting
variation modes are used as predictors of AD from NC. The discrimination ability 
of these predictors is evaluated in terms of their classification performances
with bagged support vector machines (SVMs). Restricting the model to landmarks
with better separation between AD and NC increases the discrimination power of
SSM. The predictors extracted on the subregions also showed stronger correlation 
with the memory-related measurements such as Logical Memory, Auditory Verbal
Learning Test (AVLT) and the memory subscores of Alzheimer Disease Assessment
Scale (ADAS).

Crown Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22037419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Neuroimage. 2012 Feb 1;59(3):2217-30. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.09.085. Epub
2011 Oct 8.

Individual subject classification for Alzheimer's disease based on incremental
learning using a spatial frequency representation of cortical thickness data.

Cho Y(1), Seong JK, Jeong Y, Shin SY; Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging
Initiative.

Collaborators: Saradha A, Abdi H, Abdulkadir A, Acharya D, Achuthan A, Adluru N, 
Aghajanian J, Agrusti A, Agyemang A, Ahdidan J, Ahmad D, Ahmed S, Aisen P,
Akhondi-Asl A, Aksu Y, Alberca R, Alcauter S, Alexander D, Alin A, Almeida F,
Alvarez-Linera J, Amlien I, Anand S, Anderson D, Ang A, Angersbach S, Ansarian R,
Aoyama E, Appannah A, Arfanakis K, Armor T, Arrighi M, Arumughababu SV, Arunagiri
V, Ashe-McNalley C, Ashford W, Le Page A, Avants B, Aviv R, Awasthi S, Ayache N, 
Ayan-Oshodi M, Ayhan M, Sumana BV, Babic T, Baek Y, Bagepally B, Baird G, Baker
J, Baker S, Bakker A, Barbash S, Bard J, Barker W, Bartlett J, Baruchin A,
Battaglini I, Bauer C, Bayley P, Beck I, Becker J, Becker JA, Beckett L, Bednar
M, Bedner A, Beg MF, Bekris L, Belaroussi B, Belloch V, Belmokhtar N, ben Ahmed
O, Bender JD, Benois-Pineau J, Bhaskar U, Bienkowska K, Biffi A, Bigler E, Bilgic
B, Bishop C, Bittner D, Black S, Bloss C, Bocti C, Bohorquez A, Bokde A, Boone J,
Boppana M, Borrie M, Bourgeat P, Bouttout H, Bowes M, Bowman D, Bowman G, Bracard
S, Braskie M, Braunewell K, Breitner J, Bresell A, Brewer J, Brickhouse M,
Brickman A, Britschgi M, Broadbent S, Brogren J, Brunton S, Buchsbaum M, Buckley 
C, Buerger K, Bunce D, Burnham S, Burns J, Burton D, Burzykowski T, Butler T,
Cabeza R, Caffery T, Cairns N, Callhoff J, Calvini P, Carbotti A, Carle A,
Carmasin J, Carmichael O, Carvalho J, Casabianca J, Casanova R, Casey A, Cash D, 
Cataldo R, Cedarbaum J, Cella M, Celsis P, Chakravarty M, Chang I, Chao L, Charil
A, Che-Wei C, Chemali Z, Chen K, Chen S, Chen R, Chen Q, Chen JT, Chen G, Chen J,
Chen W, Cheng WC, Cheng X, Cherkas Y, Chertkow H, Cheung V, Cheung C, Chiang G,
Chiao P, Chibane MB, Chida N, Chin S, Ching C, Chisholm J, Cho C, Cho Y, Choe J, 
Choubey S, Chowbina S, Christensen AL, Ciocia G, Clark D, Clark C, Clarkson M,
Clerc S, Clunie D, Coen M, Coimbra A, Compton D, Coppola G, Coubard O, Coulin S, 
Cover KS, Crane P, Crans G, Croop R, Crowther D, Crum W, Cui Y, Curry C, Cutter
G, Da L, Daliri MR, Damato VD, Darby E, Darkner S, Davatzikos C, DavidPrakash B, 
Davidson C, Davis M, de Bruijne M, De Meyer G, De Nunzio G, DeCarli C, Dechairo
B, DeDuck K, Dehghan H, Delfino M, Della Rosa PA, Dellavedova L, Delpassand E,
Delrieu J, DeOrchis V, Carron DD, Desjardins B, deToledo-Morrell L, Devanand D,
Devanarayan V, Devier D, Devous M, Dgetluck N, Di J, Di X, Diaz-Arrastia R,
Dickerson B, Dickie DA, Dill V, Ding X, Dinov I, Dobosh B, Dobson H, Dodge H,
Dolman A, Dolmo BC, Donohue M, Dore V, Dorflinger E, Dowling M, Dragicevic N,
Dubal D, Duchesne S, Duff K, Dukart J, Durazzo T, Dutta J, DWors R, Earl N, Edula
G, Elcoroaristizabal X, Emahazion T, Endres C, Epstein N, Ereshefsky L, Eskildsen
S, Espinosa A, Esposito M, Ewers M, Falcone G, Fan Y, Fan J, Fan L, Farahibozorg 
S, Farb N, Fardo D, Farias S, Farnum M, Farrer L, Fatke B, Faux N, Feldman H,
Feldman S, Feldman B, Félix Z, Fennema-Notestine C, Fernandes M, Fernandez E,
Ferreira MJ, Ferrer E, Fetterman B, Figurski M, Fillit H, Finch S, Fiot JB,
Flenniken D, Fletcher E, Flores C, Longmire CF, Focke N, Forman M, Forsythe A,
Fox S, Fox-Bosetti S, Foxhall S, Franko E, Freeman R, Friedrich CM, Friesenhahn
M, Frisoni G, Fritzsche K, Fujimoto Y, Fujiwara K, Fullerton T, Gaffour Y, Galvin
B, Gamst A, Gao S, Garg G, Gaser C, Gastineau E, Gattaz W, Gaubert M, Gauthier S,
Gavett B, Ge T, Gemme G, Geraci J, Gholipour F, Ghosh D, Ghosh S, Gieschke R,
Gill R, Gillespie W, Gitelman D, Gkontra X, Gleason C, Glymour MM, Godbey M, Gold
B, Goldberg T, Goldman J, Gonzalez-Beltran A, Goodro R, Gore C, Gorriz JM, Goto
M, Grachev I, Gradkowski W, Grandey E, Grasela T, Gray K, Greenberg B, Greicius
M, Grill J, Gross A, Gross A, Grydeland H, Guignot I, Guo Q, Guo LH, Guo H, Gupta
V, Guyot J, Habeck C, Habte F, Haight T, Hajaj C, Hajiesmaeili M, Hajjar I,
Hammarstrom P, Hampel H, Han D, Han J, Han Z, Hanna Y, Hao Y, Hardy P, Harvey D, 
Hasan MK, Hayashi T, Haynes JD, He H, He Y, Head D, Heckemann R, Heegaard N,
Heidebrink J, Hellyer P, Helwig M, Henderson D, Herholz K, Herskovits AZ, Hess C,
Hildenbrand M, MIng AY, Hobart J, Hochstetler H, Hofer S, Hoffman J, Holder D,
Hollingworth P, Holmes R, Hong Q, Honigberg L, Hope T, Hoppin J, Hot P, Hou Y,
Hsieh H, Hsu A, Hu X, Hu M, Hu W, Hua WY, Huang S, Huang F, Huang Z, Huang CJ,
Huang CC, Huang J, Hubbard R, Huentelman M, Huppertz HJ, Hurko O, Hurt S,
Hutchins J, Hwang S, Hyun J, Ifeachor E, Iglesias M, Ikari Y, Ikonomidou V, Iman 
A, Imani F, Immermann F, Inlow M, Inoue L, Insel P, Irizarry M, Ishibashi T,
Ishii K, Ismail S, Ito K, Iturria-Medina Y, Iwatsubo T, Jacks A, Jacobson M,
Jacqmin P, Jaffe C, Jagust W, Janousova E, Jara H, Jasperse B, Jedynak B,
Jefferson A, Jennings JR, Jenq J, Jessen W, Jia F, Jiang T, Jiao Y, JIng H,
Johnson K, Johnson S, Johnson DK, Johnson J, Jones G, Jones M, Jones R, Joshi S, 
Jouvent E, Juengling F, Julin P, Junjie Z, Kabilan M, Kadish B, Kairui Z, Kam HJ,
Kamboh MI, Kamer A, Kanakaraj S, Kanchev V, Kaneko T, Kaneta T, Kang H, Kang JH, 
Kang J, Karageorgiou E, Karantzoulis S, Karlawish J, Katz E, Kaushik SS, Kauwe J,
Kawakami H, Kawashima S, Kaye E, Kazemi S, Ke H, Kelleher T, Kennedy R, Keogh B, 
Kerchner G, Kerr D, Keshava N, Khalil I, Khalil A, Khondker Z, Kihara T, Killeen 
N, Killiany R, Kim D, Kim H, Kim S, Kim JH, Kim A, Kim JH, Kimberg D, Kimura T,
King R, Kirby J, Kirsch W, Klimas M, Kline R, Kling M, Klopfenstein E, Koen J,
Koikkalainen J, Kokomoor A, Kong X, Koppel J, Korolev I, Kotran N, Kowalczyk A,
Krahnke T, Krams M, Kuceyeski A, Kuhl D, Kumar V, Roy PK, Kuo J, Labrish C, Lai
S, Lakatos A, Lalonde F, Lam OK, Lampron A, Landau S, Lane R, Lane B, Langbaum J,
Langford D, Lanius V, Latella M, Leahy R, Lee Ja, Lee D, Lee N, Lee S, Lee D, Lee
G, Lefkimmiatis S, Lemaitre H, Lenfant P, Lenz R, Leong J, Leoutsakos JM, Leung
YY, Levey A, Li R, Li X, Li W, Li X, Li M, Li L, Li J, Li G, Li Q, Li Y, Li J, Li
J, Li Y, Li S, Liang K, Liang K, Liang P, Liang L, Liao W, Liaquat S, Liberman G,
Lin L, Lin AL, Lin F, Liu T, Liu D, Liu L, Liu H, Liu S, Liu T, Liu X, Liu S, Liu
L, Liu W, Liu G, Liu T, Liu Y, Liu C, Lo R, Lobanov V, Lockhart A, Loewenstein D,
Logovinsky V, Long M, Long Z, Long X, Looi J, Lu H, Lu PH, Lucena N, Lukas C,
Lukic A, Luo L, Luo X, Luo X, Lynch J, Ma SM, Mackin S, Mada M, Madabhushi A,
Maglio S, Mahanta MS, Maikusa N, Maldjian J, Mandal I, Manjon J, Mantri N,
Manzour A, Marchewka A, Marcus D, Margolin R, Marrett S, Marshall G, Gonzelez AM,
Torteya AM, Mather M, Mathis C, Mattei P, Matthews D, McArdle J, McCarroll S,
McEvoy L, McGeown W, McGinnis S, McGonigle J, McIntyre J, McLaren D, McQuail J,
Meadowcroft M, Meda S, Melie-Garcia L, Melrose R, Mendelson A, Mendez M, Menendez
E, Meng M, Meredith J, Metti A, Meyer C, Mez J, Mickael G, Miftahof R, Mikula M, 
Miller M, Millikin C, Mintun M, Mirza M, Mistridis P, Mitchell M, Mitsis E, Mon
A, Moore D, Morabito FC, Birgani PM, Moratal D, Morimoto B, Mormino E, Morris J, 
Mortamet B, Moscato P, Mueller K, Mueller S, Mukherjee S, Mulder E, Mungas D,
Munir K, Murayama S, Murphy M, Myers A, Sairam N, Nagata K, Nair A, Nativio R,
Nazarparvar B, Nazeri A, Nejad L, Nekooei S, Nettiksimmons J, Neu S, Ng YB,
Nguyen N, Nichols T, Nicodemus K, Niecko T, Nielsen C, Nishio T, Nordstrom M,
Noshad S, Notomi K, Novak N, Nutakki GC, O'Bryant S, Obisesan T, Oh J, Okonkwo O,
Olde Rikkert M, Oliveira A, Oliveira J, Oliver R, Olmos S, Oltra J, Ortner M,
Osadebey M, Ostrowitzki S, Overholser R, Anishiya P, Chitra PK, Pa J, Palanisamy 
P, Pan S, Pan Z, Pande Y, Pardo J, Pardoe H, Park SH, Park S, Park L, Park H,
Park MH, Parker C, Patel Y, Patil A, Patil M, Pawlak M, Payoux P, Pearson J, Pell
G, Peng Y, Pennec X, Pepin Jl, Pereira F, Perneczky R, Petitti D, Petrella J,
Peyrat JM, Ngoc PT, Phillips J, Nicole P, Pian WT, Pierson R, Piovezan M,
Pipitone J, Pirraglia E, Planes X, Podhorski A, Pollari M, Pomara N, Pontecorvo
M, Popov V, Poppenk J, Posner H, Potkin S, Potter G, Potter E, Poulin S, Prastawa
M, Prince J, Priya A, Pruessner J, Qiu W, Qu A, Qualls CD, Quarg P, Quinlan J,
Rabbia M, Rajagovindan R, Rajeesh R, Rallabandi VP, Ramadubramani V, Ramage A,
Ramirez A, Randolph C, Rao A, Rao H, Rao D, Raubertas R, Ray D, Razak H, Reed B, 
Reid A, Reilhac A, Reiner P, Reinsberger C, Restrepo L, Retico A, Rhatigan L,
Rhinn H, Rhoades E, Ribbens A, Richard E, Richards J, Richter M, Riddle W,
Ridgway G, Ries M, Ringman J, Rischall M, Rizk-Jackson A, Rizzi M, Robieson W,
Rodriguez L, Rodriguez-Vieitez E, Rogalski E, Rogers E, Balderrama JR, Rokicki J,
Romero K, Rorden C, Rosand J, Rosen O, Rosenberg P, Roubini E, Rousseau F, Rowe
C, Rubin D, Rubright J, Rucinski M, Ruiz A, Rulseh A, Rusinek H, Ryan L, Saad A, 
Sabuncu M, Sahuquillo J, Said Y, Saito N, Sakata M, Salama M, Salazar D, Salter
H, Saman S, Sanchez L, Sanders E, Sankar T, Santhamma S, Sarnel H, Sasaki T,
Sasaya T, Sato H, Sattlecker M, Saumier D, Savio A, Saykin A, Scanlon B, Scharre 
D, Schegerin M, Schmand B, Schmansky N, Schmidt-Wilcke T, Schramm H, Schuerch M, 
Schwartz C, Schwartz E, Schwarz A, Schwarz J, Selnes P, Sembritzki K, Senjem M,
Sevigny J, Sfikas G, Sghedoni R, Shah SK, Shahbaba B, Shams S, Shankle W,
Shattuck D, Shaw L, Sheela J, Shen J, Shen Q, Shen W, Shen Q, Shera D, Sherman J,
Sherva R, Shi J, Shi Y, Shi F, Shokouhi S, Shukla V, Shulman J, Sideris K, Siegel
R, Silveira M, Silverman D, Sim I, Simak A, Simmons A, Simoes R, Simon A, Simon
M, Simpson I, Singh N, Singh SP, Sinha N, Siuciak J, Sjögren N, Skinner J, Smith 
M, Smith C, Smyth T, Snow S, Snyder P, Soares H, Soldan A, Soldea O, Solomon A,
Solomon P, Som S, Song Z, Song S, Sosova I, Soydemir M, Spampinato MV, Speier W, 
Sperling R, Spiegel R, Spies L, Springate B, Staff R, Steffener J, Stern Y,
Stokman H, Straw J, Stricker N, Stühler E, Styren S, Subramanian V, Suen S,
Sugishita M, Sukkar R, Sun Y, Sun J, Sun Y, Sundell K, Suzuki A, Svetnik V, Swan 
M, Symons S, Szigeti K, Szoeke C, Sørensen L, Genish T, Takahasi T, Takeuchi T,
Tanaka S, Tanaka R, Tanchi C, Tancredi D, Tang Q, Tarnow E, Tartaglia MC, Tarver 
E, Tassy D, Tauber C, Taylor-Reinwald L, Teipel S, Teng E, Terriza F, Thambisetty
M, Thames A, Thatavarti RS, Thiele F, Thomas C, Thomas R, Thomas B, Thompson P,
Thompson W, Thornton-Wells T, Thorvaldsson V, Thurfjell L, Tokuda T, Toledo JB,
Tölli T, Toma A, Tomita N, Toro R, Torrealdea P, Tosto G, Tosun D, Tousian M,
Toussaint P, Toyoshiba H, Tractenberg RE, Triggs T, Trittschuh E, Trojanowski J, 
Trotta G, Huu TT, Truran D, Tsanas A, Tsang C, Tufail A, Tung J, Turken A, Ueda
Y, Uematsu D, Ullrich L, Venkataraju KU, Umar N, Ungar L, Uzunbas G, Van de Nes
J, van der Brug M, van der Lijn F, Van Hecke W, Van Horn J, Van Leemput K, Van
Train K, Varkuti B, Vasanawala M, Veeraraghavan H, Vemuri P, Verma M, Videbaek C,
Vidoni E, Villanueva-Meyer J, Vinyes G, Visser PJ, Vitek M, Vogel S, Voineskos A,
Vos S, Vounou M, Wade S, Walsh A, Wan H, Wang T, Wang YM, Wang W, Wang A, Wang S,
Wang L, Wang L, Wang Y, Wang LS, Wang L, Wang A, Wang Y, Wang X, Wang Z, Wang T, 
Ward M, Ward A, Watanabe T, Watson D, Webb D, Wefel J, Weiner M, Westlye LT,
Wheland D, Whitcher B, White B, Whitlow C, Wilhelmsen K, Wilmot B, Wilson L,
Wimsatt M, Wingo T, Wirth M, Wishart H, Wiste H, Wolf H, Wolke I, Wolz R, Wong K,
Woo J, Woo E, Woods L, Worth A, Wu Y, Wu L, Wu E, Wyman B, Xiao G, Xie S, Xu J,
Xu G, Xu S, Xu S, Xu Y, Xu YZ, Yamada T, Yamashita F, Yan P, Yan Y, Yang G, Yang 
W, Yang E, Yang HD, Yang J, Yang CY, Yang Z, Yang E, Yassa M, Yavorsky C, Ye BS, 
Ye L, Ye J, Yee L, Ying S, Yokoyama T, Young S, Young J, Younhyun J, Yu D, Yu S, 
Yu CQ, Yu P, Yu D, Yuan Y, Yuan G, Yuan K, Yuen B, Yushkevich P, Zaborszky L,
Zagorodnov V, Zagorski M, Zahodne L, Zarei M, Zawadzki R, Zeitzer J, Zelinski E, 
Zeskind B, Zhan S, Zhang J, Zhang L, Zhang Z, Zhang L, Zhang Z, Zhang D, Zhang H,
Zhang X, Zhang T, Zhang P, Zhao J, Zhao Q, Zhao P, Zhen X, Zhijun Y, Zhou L, Zhou
B, Zhou Y, Zhou S, Zhu H, Zhu W, Zhu W, Zhu X, Ziegler G, Zilka S, Zisserman A,
Zito G, Zu C, Zulfigar A.

Patterns of brain atrophy measured by magnetic resonance structural imaging have 
been utilized as significant biomarkers for diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease
(AD). However, brain atrophy is variable across patients and is non-specific for 
AD in general. Thus, automatic methods for AD classification require a large
number of structural data due to complex and variable patterns of brain atrophy. 
In this paper, we propose an incremental method for AD classification using
cortical thickness data. We represent the cortical thickness data of a subject in
terms of their spatial frequency components, employing the manifold harmonic
transform. The basis functions for this transform are obtained from the
eigenfunctions of the Laplace-Beltrami operator, which are dependent only on the 
geometry of a cortical surface but not on the cortical thickness defined on it.
This facilitates individual subject classification based on incremental learning.
In general, methods based on region-wise features poorly reflect the detailed
spatial variation of cortical thickness, and those based on vertex-wise features 
are sensitive to noise. Adopting a vertex-wise cortical thickness representation,
our method can still achieve robustness to noise by filtering out high frequency 
components of the cortical thickness data while reflecting their spatial
variation. This compromise leads to high accuracy in AD classification. We
utilized MR volumes provided by Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative
(ADNI) to validate the performance of the method. Our method discriminated AD
patients from Healthy Control (HC) subjects with 82% sensitivity and 93%
specificity. It also discriminated Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) patients, who 
converted to AD within 18 months, from non-converted MCI subjects with 63%
sensitivity and 76% specificity. Moreover, it showed that the entorhinal cortex
was the most discriminative region for classification, which is consistent with
previous pathological findings. In comparison with other classification methods, 
our method demonstrated high classification performance in both categories, which
supports the discriminative power of our method in both AD diagnosis and AD
prediction.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22008371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Neuroimage. 2012 Feb 1;59(3):2362-73. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.09.012. Epub
2011 Sep 16.

BEaST: brain extraction based on nonlocal segmentation technique.

Eskildsen SF(1), Coupé P, Fonov V, Manjón JV, Leung KK, Guizard N, Wassef SN,
Østergaard LR, Collins DL; Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Collaborators: Saradha A, Abdi H, Abdulkadir A, Acharya D, Achuthan A, Adluru N, 
Aghajanian J, Agrusti A, Agyemang A, Ahdidan J, Ahmad D, Ahmed S, Aisen P,
Akhondi-Asl A, Aksu Y, Alberca R, Alcauter S, Alexander D, Alin A, Almeida F,
Alvarez-Linera J, Amlien I, Anand S, Anderson D, Ang A, Angersbach S, Ansarian R,
Aoyama E, Appannah A, Arfanakis K, Armor T, Arrighi M, Arumughababu SV, Arunagiri
V, Ashe-McNalley C, Ashford W, Le Page A, Avants B, Aviv R, Awasthi S, Ayache N, 
Ayan-Oshodi M, Ayhan M, Sumana BV, Babic T, Baek Y, Bagepally B, Baird G, Baker
J, Baker S, Bakker A, Barbash S, Bard J, Barker W, Bartlett J, Baruchin A,
Battaglini I, Bauer C, Bayley P, Beck I, Becker J, Becker JA, Beckett L, Bednar
M, Bedner A, Beg MF, Bekris L, Belaroussi B, Belloch V, Belmokhtar N, Ben Ahmed
O, Bender JD, Benois-Pineau J, Bhaskar U, Bienkowska K, Biffi A, Bigler E, Bilgic
B, Bishop C, Bittner D, Black S, Bloss C, Bocti C, Bohorquez A, Bokde A, Boone J,
Boppana M, Borrie M, Bourgeat P, Bouttout H, Bowes M, Bowman D, Bowman G, Bracard
S, Braskie M, Braunewell K, Breitner J, Bresell A, Brewer J, Brickhouse M,
Brickman A, Britschgi M, Broadbent S, Brogren J, Brunton S, Buchsbaum M, Buckley 
C, Buerger K, Bunce D, Burnham S, Burns J, Burton D, Burzykowski T, Butler T,
Cabeza R, Caffery T, Cairns N, Callhoff J, Calvini P, Carbotti A, Carle A,
Carmasin J, Carmichael O, Carvalho J, Casabianca J, Casanova R, Casey A, Cash D, 
Cataldo R, Cedarbaum J, Cella M, Celsis P, Chakravarty M, Chang I, Chao L, Charil
A, Chang CW, Chemali Z, Chen K, Chen S, Chen R, Chen Q, Chen JT, Chen G, Chen J, 
Chen W, Cheng WC, Cheng X, Cherkas Y, Chertkow H, Cheung V, Cheung C, Chiang G,
Chiao P, Chibane MB, Chida N, Chin S, Ching C, Chisholm J, Cho C, Cho Y, Choe J, 
Choubey S, Chowbina S, Christensen AL, Ciocia G, Clark D, Clark C, Clarkson M,
Clerc S, Clunie D, Coen M, Coimbra A, Compton D, Coppola G, Coubard O, Coulin S, 
Cover KS, Crane P, Crans G, Croop R, Crowther D, Crum W, Cui Y, Curry C, Cutter
G, Da L, Daliri MR, Damato VD, Darby E, Darkner S, Davatzikos C, DavidPrakash B, 
Davidson C, Davis M, de Bruijne M, De Meyer G, De Nunzio G, DeCarli C, Dechairo
B, DeDuck K, Dehghan H, Delfino M, Della Rosa PA, Dellavedova L, Delpassand E,
Delrieu J, DeOrchis V, Dépy Carron D, Desjardins B, deToledo-Morrell L, Devanand 
D, Devanarayan V, Devier D, Devous M, Dgetluck N, Di J, Di X, Diaz-Arrastia R,
Dickerson B, Dickie DA, Dill V, Ding X, Dinov I, Dobosh B, Dobson H, Dodge H,
Dolman A, Dolmo BC, Donohue M, Dore V, Dorflinger E, Dowling M, Dragicevic N,
Dubal D, Duchesne S, Duff K, Dukart J, Durazzo T, Dutta J, DWors R, Earl N, Edula
G, Elcoroaristizabal X, Emahazion T, Endres C, Epstein N, Ereshefsky L, Eskildsen
S, Espinosa A, Esposito M, Ewers M, Falcone G, Fan Y, Fan J, Fan L, Farahibozorg 
S, Farb N, Fardo D, Farias S, Farnum M, Farrer L, Fatke B, Faux N, Feldman H,
Feldman S, Feldman B, Félix Z, Fennema-Notestine C, Fernandes M, Fernandez E,
Ferreira MJ, Ferrer E, Fetterman B, Figurski M, Fillit H, Finch S, Fiot JB,
Flenniken D, Fletcher E, Flores C, Longmire CF, Focke N, Forman M, Forsythe A,
Fox S, Fox-Bosetti S, Foxhall S, Franko E, Freeman R, Friedrich CM, Friesenhahn
M, Frisoni G, Fritzsche K, Fujimoto Y, Fujiwara K, Fullerton T, Gaffour Y, Galvin
B, Gamst A, Gao S, Garg G, Gaser C, Gastineau E, Gattaz W, Gaubert M, Gauthier S,
Gavett B, Ge T, Gemme G, Geraci J, Gholipour F, Ghosh D, Ghosh S, Gieschke R,
Gill R, Gillespie W, Gitelman D, Gkontra X, Gleason C, Glymour MM, Godbey M, Gold
B, Goldberg T, Goldman J, Gonzalez-Beltran A, Goodro R, Gore C, Gorriz JM, Goto
M, Grachev I, Gradkowski W, Grandey E, Grasela T, Gray K, Greenberg B, Greicius
M, Grill J, Gross A, Gross A, Grydeland H, Guignot I, Guo Q, Guo LH, Guo H, Gupta
V, Guyot J, Habeck C, Habte F, Haight T, Hajaj C, Hajiesmaeili M, Hajjar I,
Hammarstrom P, Hampel H, Han D, Han J, Han Z, Hanna Y, Hao Y, Hardy P, Harvey D, 
Hasan MK, Hayashi T, Haynes JD, He H, He Y, Head D, Heckemann R, Heegaard N,
Heidebrink J, Hellyer P, Helwig M, Henderson D, Herholz K, Herskovits AZ, Hess C,
Hildenbrand M, Ming AY, Hobart J, Hochstetler H, Hofer S, Hoffman J, Holder D,
Hollingworth P, Holmes R, Hong Q, Honigberg L, Hope T, Hoppin J, Hot P, Hou Y,
Hsieh H, Hsu A, Hu X, Hu M, Hu W, Hua WY, Huang S, Huang F, Huang Z, Huang CJ,
Huang CC, Huang J, Hubbard R, Huentelman M, Huppertz HJ, Hurko O, Hurt S,
Hutchins J, Hwang S, Hyun J, Ifeachor E, Iglesias M, Ikari Y, Ikonomidou V, Iman 
A, Imani F, Immermann F, Inlow M, Inoue L, Insel P, Irizarry M, Ishibashi T,
Ishii K, Ismail S, Ito K, Iturria-Medina Y, Iwatsubo T, Jacks A, Jacobson M,
Jacqmin P, Jaffe C, Jagust W, Janousova E, Jara H, Jasperse B, Jedynak B,
Jefferson A, Jennings JR, Jenq J, Jessen W, Jia F, Jiang T, Jiao Y, Jing H,
Johnson K, Johnson S, Johnson DK, Johnson J, Jones G, Jones M, Jones R, Joshi S, 
Jouvent E, Juengling F, Julin P, Junjie Z, Kabilan M, Kadish B, Kairui Z, Kam HJ,
Kamboh MI, Kamer A, Kanakaraj S, Kanchev V, Kaneko T, Kaneta T, Kang H, Kang JH, 
Kang J, Karageorgiou E, Karantzoulis S, Karlawish J, Katz E, Kaushik SS, Kauwe J,
Kawakami H, Kawashima S, Kaye E, Kazemi S, Ke H, Kelleher T, Kennedy R, Keogh B, 
Kerchner G, Kerr D, Keshava N, Khalil I, Khalil A, Khondker Z, Kihara T, Killeen 
N, Killiany R, Kim D, Kim H, Kim S, Kim JH, Kim A, Kim JH, Kimberg D, Kimura T,
King R, Kirby J, Kirsch W, Klimas M, Kline R, Kling M, Klopfenstein E, Koen J,
Koikkalainen J, Kokomoor A, Kong X, Koppel J, Korolev I, Kotran N, Kowalczyk A,
Krahnke T, Krams M, Kuceyeski A, Kuhl D, Kumar V, Roy PK, Kuo J, Labrish C, Lai
S, Lakatos A, Lalonde F, Lam OK, Lampron A, Landau S, Lane R, Lane B, Langbaum J,
Langford D, Lanius V, Latella M, Leahy R, an Lee J, Lee D, Lee N, Lee S, Lee D,
Lee G, Lefkimmiatis S, Lemaitre H, Lenfant P, Lenz R, Leong J, Leoutsakos JM,
Leung YY, Levey A, Li R, Li X, Li W, Li X, Li M, Li L, Li J, Li G, Li Q, Li Y, Li
J, Li J, Li Y, Li S, Liang K, Liang K, Liang P, Liang L, Liao W, Liaquat S,
Liberman G, Lin L, Lin AL, Lin F, Liu T, Liu D, Liu L, Liu H, Liu S, Liu T, Liu
X, Liu S, Liu L, Liu W, Liu G, Liu T, Liu Y, Liu C, Lo R, Lobanov V, Lockhart A, 
Loewenstein D, Logovinsky V, Long M, Long Z, Long X, Looi J, Lu H, Lu PH, Lucena 
N, Lukas C, Lukic A, Luo L, Luo X, Luo X, Lynch J, Ma SM, Mackin S, Mada M,
Madabhushi A, Maglio S, Mahanta MS, Maikusa N, Maldjian J, Mandal I, Manjon J,
Mantri N, Manzour A, Marchewka A, Marcus D, Margolin R, Marrett S, Marshall G,
Gonzalez AM, Torteya AM, Mather M, Mathis C, Mattei P, Matthews D, McArdle J,
McCarroll S, McEvoy L, McGeown W, McGinnis S, McGonigle J, McIntyre J, McLaren D,
McQuail J, Meadowcroft M, Meda S, Melie-Garcia L, Melrose R, Mendelson A, Mendez 
M, Menendez E, Meng M, Meredith J, Metti A, Meyer C, Mez J, Mickael G, Miftahof
R, Mikula M, Miller M, Millikin C, Nintun M, Mirza M, Mistridis P, Mitchell M,
Mitsis E, Mon A, Moore D, Morabito FC, Birgani PM, Moratal D, Morimoto B, Mormino
E, Morris J, Mortamet B, Moscato P, Mueller K, Mueller S, Mukherjee S, Mulder E, 
Mungas D, Munir K, Murayama S, Murphy M, Myers A, Sairam N, Nagata K, Nair A,
Nativio R, Nazarparvar B, Nazeri A, Nejad L, Nekooei S, Nettiksimmons J, Neu S,
Ng YB, Nguyen N, Nichols T, Nicodemus K, Niecko T, Nielsen C, Nishio T, Nordstrom
M, Noshad S, Notomi K, Novak N, Nutakki GC, O'Bryant S, Obisesan T, Oh J, Okonkwo
O, Olde Rikkert M, Oliveira A, Oliveira J, Oliver R, Olmos S, Oltra J, Ortner M, 
Osadebey M, Ostrowitzki S, Overholser R, Anishiya P, Chitra PK, Pa J, Palanisamy 
P, Pan S, Pan Z, Pande Y, Pardo J, Pardoe H, Park SH, Park S, Park L, Park H,
Park MH, Parker C, Patel Y, Patil A, Patil M, Pawlak M, Payoux P, Pearson J, Pell
G, Peng Y, Pennec X, Pepin JL, Pereira F, Perneczky R, Petitti D, Petrella J,
Peyrat JM, Ngoc PT, Phillips J, Phillips N, Pian WT, Pierson R, Piovezan M,
Pipitone J, Pirraglia E, Planes X, Podhorski A, Pollari M, Pomara N, Pontecorvo
M, Popov V, Poppenk J, Posner H, Potkin S, Potter G, Potter E, Poulin S, Prastawa
M, Prince J, Priya A, Pruessner J, Qiu W, Qu A, Qualls CD, Quarg P, Quinlan J,
Rabbia M, Rajagovindan R, Rajeesh R, Rallabandi VP, Ramadubramani V, Ramage A,
Ramirez A, Randolph C, Rao A, Rao H, Rao D, Raubertas R, Ray D, Razak H, Reed B, 
Reid A, Reilhac A, Reiner P, Reinsberger C, Restrepo L, Retico A, Rhatigan L,
Rhinn H, Rhoades E, Ribbens A, Richard E, Richards J, Richter M, Riddle W,
Ridgway G, Ries M, Ringman J, Rischall M, Rizk-Jackson A, Rizzi M, Robieson W,
Rodriguez L, Rodriguez-Vieitez E, Rogalski E, Rogers E, Balderrama JR, Rokicki J,
Romero K, Rorden C, Rosand J, Rosen O, Rosenberg P, Roubini E, Rousseau F, Rowe
C, Rubin D, Rubright J, Rucinski M, Ruiz A, Rulseh A, Rusinek H, Ryan L, Saad A, 
Sabuncu M, Sahuquillo J, Said Y, Saito N, Sakata M, Salama M, Salazar D, Salter
H, Saman S, Sanchez L, Sanders E, Sankar T, Santhamma S, Sarnel H, Sasaki T,
Sasaya T, Sato H, Sattlecker M, Saumier D, Savio A, Saykin A, Scanlon B, Scharre 
D, Schegerin M, Schmand B, Schmansky N, Schmidt-Wilcke T, Schramm H, Schuerch M, 
Schwartz C, Schwartz E, Schwarz A, Schwarz J, Selnes P, Sembritzki K, Senjem M,
Sevigny J, Sfikas G, Sghedoni R, Shah SK, Shahbaba B, Shams S, Shankle W,
Shattuck D, Shaw L, Sheela J, Shen J, Shen Q, Shen W, Shen Q, Shera D, Sherman J,
Sherva R, Shi J, Shokouhi S, Shukla V, Shulman J, Sideris K, Siegel R, Silveira
M, Silverman D, Sim I, Simak A, Simmons A, Simoes R, Simmons A, Simoes R, Simon
A, Simon M, Simpson I, Singh N, Singh SP, Sinha N, Siuciak J, Sjögren N, Skinner 
J, Smith M, Smith C, Smyth T, Snow S, Snyder P, Soares H, Soldan A, Soldea O,
Solomon A, Solomon P, Som S, Song Z, Song S, Sosova I, Soydemir M, Spampinato MV,
Speier W, Sperling R, Spiegel R, Spies L, Springate B, Staff R, Steffener J,
Stern Y, Stokman H, Straw J, Stricker N, Stühler E, Styren S, Subramanian V, Suen
S, Sugishita M, Sukkar R, Sun Y, Sun J, Sun Y, Sun Y, Sundell K, Suzuki A,
Svetnik V, Swan M, Symons S, Szigeti K, Szoeke C, Sørensen L, Genish T, Takahasi 
T, Takeuchi T, Tanaka R, Tanchi C, Tancredi D, Tang Q, Tarnow E, Tartaglia MC,
Tarver E, Tassy D, Tauber C, Taylor-Reinwald L, Teipel S, Teng E, Terriza F,
Thambisetty M, Thames A, Thatavarti RS, Thiele F, Thomas R, Thomas B, Thomas C,
Thompson W, Thompson P, Thornton-Wells T, Thorvaldsson V, Thurfjell L, Tokuda T, 
Toledo JB, Tölli T, Toma A, Tomita N, Toro R, Torrealdea P, Tosto G, Tosun D,
Tousian M, Toussaint P, Toyoshiba H, Tractenberg RE, Triggs T, Trittschuh E,
Trojanowski J, Trotta G, Huu TT, Truran D, Tsanas A, Tsang C, Tufail A, Tung J,
Turken A, Ueda Y, Uematsu D, Ullrich L, Venkataraju KU, Umar N, Ungar L, Uzunbas 
G, Van de Nes J, van der Brug M, van der Lijn F, Van Hecke W, Van Horn J, Van
Leemput K, Van Train K, Varkuti B, Vasanawala M, Veeraraghavan H, Vemuri P, Verma
M, Videbaek C, Vidoni E, Villanueva-Meyer J, Vinyes G, Visser PJ, Vitek M, Vogel 
S, Voineskos A, Vos S, Vounou M, Wade S, Walsh A, Wan H, Wang T, Wang YM, Wang W,
Wang A, Wang S, Wang L, Wang L, Wang Y, Wang LS, Wang L, Wang A, Wang Y, Wang X, 
Wang Z, Wang T, Ward M, Ward A, Watanabe T, Watson D, Webb D, Wefel J, Weiner M, 
Westlye LT, Wheland D, Whitcher B, White B, Whitlow C, Wilhelmsen K, Wilmot B,
Wilson L, Wimsatt M, Wingo T, Wirth M, Wishart H, Wiste H, Wolf H, Wolke I, Wolz 
R, Wong K, Woo J, Woo E, Woods L, Worth A, Wu Y, Wu L, Wu E, Wyman B, Xiao G, Xie
S, Xu J, Xu G, Xu S, Xu S, Xu Y, Xu YZ, Yamada T, Yamashita F, Yan P, Yan Y, Yang
G, Yang W, Yang E, Yang HD, Yang J, Yang CY, Yang Z, Yang E, Yassa M, Yavorsky C,
Ye BS, Ye L, Ye J, Yee L, Ying S, Yokoyama T, Young S, Young J, Younhyun J, Yu D,
Yu S, Yu CQ, Yu P, Yu D, Yuan Y, Yuan G, Yuan K, Yuen B, Yushkevich P, Zaborszky 
L, Zagorodnov V, Zagorski M, Zahodne L, Zarei M, Zawadzki R, Zeitzer J, Zelinski 
E, Zeskind B, Zhan S, Zhang J, Zhang L, Zhang Z, Zhang L, Zhang Z, Zhang D, Zhang
H, Zhang X, Zhang T, Zhang P, Zhao J, Zhao Q, Zhao P, Zhen X, Zhijun Y, Zhou L,
Zhou B, Zhou Y, Zhou S, Zhu H, Zhu W, Zhu W, Zhu X, Ziegler G, Zilka S, Zisserman
A, Zito G, Zu C, Zulfigar A.

Brain extraction is an important step in the analysis of brain images. The
variability in brain morphology and the difference in intensity characteristics
due to imaging sequences make the development of a general purpose brain
extraction algorithm challenging. To address this issue, we propose a new robust 
method (BEaST) dedicated to produce consistent and accurate brain extraction.
This method is based on nonlocal segmentation embedded in a multi-resolution
framework. A library of 80 priors is semi-automatically constructed from the
NIH-sponsored MRI study of normal brain development, the International Consortium
for Brain Mapping, and the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative databases.
In testing, a mean Dice similarity coefficient of 0.9834±0.0053 was obtained when
performing leave-one-out cross validation selecting only 20 priors from the
library. Validation using the online Segmentation Validation Engine resulted in a
top ranking position with a mean Dice coefficient of 0.9781±0.0047. Robustness of
BEaST is demonstrated on all baseline ADNI data, resulting in a very low failure 
rate. The segmentation accuracy of the method is better than two widely used
publicly available methods and recent state-of-the-art hybrid approaches. BEaST
provides results comparable to a recent label fusion approach, while being 40
times faster and requiring a much smaller library of priors.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21945694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Schizophr Res. 2011 Nov;132(2-3):121-4. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2011.08.007. Epub
2011 Sep 3.

The putative functional rs1045881 marker of neurexin-1 in schizophrenia and
clozapine response.

Lett TA(1), Tiwari AK, Meltzer HY, Lieberman JA, Potkin SG, Voineskos AN, Kennedy
JL, Müller DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Neurogenetics Section, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto,
Canada.

Neurexin-1 (NRXN1) modulates recruitment of NMDA receptors. Furthermore,
clozapine reduces hyperactivity of NMDA receptors. Thus, regulation of the NRXN1 
gene may mediate the efficacy of clozapine at reducing cortical hyperactivity. We
examined the putative functional SNP, rs1045881, for association with
schizophrenia, and the potential role of this SNP in clozapine response. The
rs1045881 variant was not significantly associated with schizophrenia (N=302
case-control pairs), but with clozapine response (N=163; p=0.030). Baseline and
BPRS scores after six months revealed a trend for rs1045881 genotype by treatment
interaction (p=0.079). In the post hoc analysis, a significant association
between BPRS negative symptoms score and genotype was observed (p=0.033). These
results suggest that the rs1045881 NRXN1 polymorphism may influence clozapine
response.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21890328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. PLoS One. 2011;6(6):e20982. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0020982. Epub 2011 Jun 8.

Neurexin-1 and frontal lobe white matter: an overlapping intermediate phenotype
for schizophrenia and autism spectrum disorders.

Voineskos AN(1), Lett TA, Lerch JP, Tiwari AK, Ameis SH, Rajji TK, Müller DJ,
Mulsant BH, Kennedy JL.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, University of Toronto, Toronto,
Canada. Aristotle_Voineskos@camh.net

BACKGROUND: Structural variation in the neurexin-1 (NRXN1) gene increases risk
for both autism spectrum disorders (ASD) and schizophrenia. However, the manner
in which NRXN1 gene variation may be related to brain morphology to confer risk
for ASD or schizophrenia is unknown.
METHOD/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: 53 healthy individuals between 18-59 years of age were
genotyped at 11 single nucleotide polymorphisms of the NRXN1 gene. All subjects
received structural MRI scans, which were processed to determine cortical gray
and white matter lobar volumes, and volumes of striatal and thalamic structures. 
Each subject's sensorimotor function was also assessed. The general linear model 
was used to calculate the influence of genetic variation on neural and cognitive 
phenotypes. Finally, in silico analysis was conducted to assess potential
functional relevance of any polymorphisms associated with brain measures. A
polymorphism located in the 3' untranslated region of NRXN1 significantly
influenced white matter volumes in whole brain and frontal lobes after correcting
for total brain volume, age and multiple comparisons. Follow-up in silico
analysis revealed that this SNP is a putative microRNA binding site that may be
of functional significance in regulating NRXN1 expression. This variant also
influenced sensorimotor performance, a neurocognitive function impaired in both
ASD and schizophrenia.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings demonstrate that the NRXN1 gene, a vulnerability gene
for SCZ and ASD, influences brain structure and cognitive function susceptible in
both disorders. In conjunction with our in silico results, our findings provide
evidence for a neural and cognitive susceptibility mechanism by which the NRXN1
gene confers risk for both schizophrenia and ASD.

PMCID: PMC3110800
PMID: 21687627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2011 Aug;36(9):1871-8. doi: 10.1038/npp.2011.72. Epub
2011 Apr 27.

The ZNF804A gene: characterization of a novel neural risk mechanism for the major
psychoses.

Voineskos AN(1), Lerch JP, Felsky D, Tiwari A, Rajji TK, Miranda D, Lobaugh NJ,
Pollock BG, Mulsant BH, Kennedy JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, University
of Toronto, Toronto, Canada. Aristotle_Voineskos@camh.net

Schizophrenia and bipolar disorder share genetic risk, brain vulnerability, and
clinical symptoms. The ZNF804A risk variant, rs1344706, confers susceptibility
for both disorders. This study aimed to identify neural mechanisms common to both
schizophrenia and bipolar disorder through this variant's potential effects on
cortical thickness, white matter tract integrity, and cognitive function.
Imaging, genetics, and cognitive measures were ascertained in 62 healthy adults
aged between 18 and 59 years. High-resolution multimodal MRI/DTI imaging was used
to measure cortical thickness and major frontotemporal and interhemispheric white
matter tracts. The general linear model was used to examine the influence of the 
ZNF804A rs1344706 risk variant on cortical thickness, white matter tract
integrity, and cognitive measures. Individuals homozygous for the risk variant
('A' allele) demonstrated reduced cortical gray matter thickness in the superior 
temporal gyrus, and in the anterior and posterior cingulate cortices compared
with C-allele carriers. No effect of the risk variant on microstructural
integrity of white matter tracts was found. Reduced attention control was found
in risk allele homozygotes, aligning with findings in the anterior cingulate
cortex. Our data provide a novel, genetically based neural risk mechanism for the
major psychoses by effects of the ZNF804A risk variant on neural structures and
cognitive function susceptible in both disorders. Our findings link genetic,
imaging, and cognitive susceptibility relevant to both schizophrenia and bipolar 
disorder.

PMCID: PMC3154105
PMID: 21525856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Psychiatr Genet. 2011 Jun;21(3):136-72. doi: 10.1097/YPG.0b013e3283469aa9.

Summaries from the XVIII World Congress of Psychiatric Genetics, Athens, Greece, 
3-7 October 2010.

Bergen SE(1), Balhara YP, Christoforou A, Cole J, Degenhardt F, Dempster E,
Fatjó-Vilas M, Khedr Y, Lopez LM, Lysenko L, McGrath LM, Mühleisen TW, Neves FS, 
Nymberg C, Ozomaro U, Verweij KJ, Voineskos AN, Zai CC, O'Shea A, DeLisi LE.

Author information: 
(1)Psychiatric and Neurodevelopmental Genetics Unit, Center for Human Genetic
Research, Massachusetts General Hospital and Stanley Center for Psychiatric
Research, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

The XVIIIth World Congress of Psychiatric Genetics, sponsored by The
International Society of Psychiatric Genetics took place in Athens, Greece on
October 3-7, 2010. Approximately 950 participants gathered to discuss the latest 
findings in this rapidly advancing field. The following report was written by
junior travel awardees, as well as others who were volunteers from student
meeting attendees. Each was assigned sessions as rapporteurs. This report
represents some of the areas covered in oral presentation during the conference, 
and reports on some of the notable major new findings described at this 2010
World Congress of Psychiatric Genetics.

PMID: 21508788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Neurobiol Aging. 2012 Jul;33(7):1486.e9-15. doi:
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2011.02.008. Epub 2011 Apr 3.

Using CSF biomarkers to replicate genetic associations in Alzheimer's disease.

Schott JM(1); ADNI Investigators.

Collaborators: Abdi H, Abdul Hadi N, Abdulkadir A, Abdullah A, Achuthan A, Adluru
N, Aggarwal N, Aghajanian J, Agyemang A, Ahdidan J, Ahmad D, Ahmed F, Ahmed S,
Ahmed F, Akbarifar R, Akhondi-Asl A, Aksu Y, Alcauter S, Alexander D, Alin A,
Alshuft H, Alvarez-Linera J, Amin-Mansour A, Anderson J, Anderson D, Andorn A,
Andrews KA, Ang A, Angersbach S, Ansarian R, Abhishek AM, Appannah A, Arfanakis
K, Arif M, Armentrout S, Arrighi M, Arumughababu SV, Arunagiri V, Ashe-McNalley
C, Ashford W, Le Page A, Avants B, Aviv R, Avula R, Ayache N, Ayan-Oshodi M,
Ayhan M, Sumana BV, Bach Cuadra M, Bagepally B, Bahar Fuchs A, Baird G, Baker S, 
Baker J, Bakker A, Baladandayuthapani V, Barbash S, Barillot C, Barker W,
Bartlett J, Bartley M, Baruchin A, Battaglini I, Bauer C, Bayley P, Becker J,
Beckett L, Bednar M, Bedner A, Beg MF, Bekris L, Belaroussi B, Belloch V,
Belmokhtar N, Ben Ahmed O, Bender JD, Bendib MM, Benois-Pineau J, Bhagchandani S,
Bienkowska K, Biffi A, Bilgin G, Billing B, Bishop C, Bittner D, Björnsdotter M, 
Black S, Bloss C, Blunck Y, Bocti C, Bohorquez A, Bokde A, Boone J, Boord P, Boot
B, Borrie M, Boudousq V, Bourgeat P, Bouttout H, Bowman D, Bowman G, Boxer A,
Bozoki A, Bracard S, Braskie M, Breitner J, Bresell A, Brewer J, Brickhouse M,
Brickman A, Britschgi M, Broadbent S, Brock B, Brown M, Buchsbaum M, Buerger K,
Bunce D, Burnham S, Burns J, Burzykowski T, Butler T, Cabeza R, Cabral G, Caffery
T, Cai Z, Callhoff J, Calvini P, Campbell N, Carbotti A, Carle A, Carmasin J,
Carmasin J, Carpenter J, Carvalho J, Casanova R, Casey A, Cash D, Cash D, Cataldo
R, Cella M, Chadaga A, Chakravarty M, Chang I, Chao L, Chaovalitwongse WA, Charil
A, Chatterjee S, Che-Wei C, Chen K, Chen G, Chen S, Chen R, Chen IJ, Chen JT,
Chen C, Chen J, Chen Q, Chen H, Cheng WC, Cheng X, Cheng B, Cherkas Y, Chertkow
H, Chiang G, Chiao P, chibane MB, Chida N, Chin S, Ching C, Chisholm J, Cho SS,
Cho C, Choe J, Choubey S, Chowbina S, Ciocia G, Clark D, Clarkson M, Clerc S,
Climer S, Clunie D, Coen M, Coimbra A, Compton D, Conover J, Coubard O, Coulin S,
Coulson E, Cover KS, Crans G, Crawford K, Croop R, Crum W, Cui Y, Da L, Dai Y,
Daiello L, Daiello L, Darkner S, Darnell R, Davatzikos C, DavidPrakash B,
Davidson C, Davis M, de Bruijne M, DeCarli C, Decker S, DeDuck K, Dehghan H,
Della Rosa PA, DeOrchis V, Dépy Carron D, Desikan R, Desjardins B,
deToledo-Morrell L, Devanand D, Devanarayan V, Devier D, Devous M, Di X, Di J,
Diaz-Arrastia R, Diciotti S, Dickerson B, Dickie DA, Dickinson P, Dill V, Ding X,
Dinov I, Dobosh B, Dobson H, Dodge H, Dolman A, Dolmo BC, Dong W, Donohue M, Dore
V, Dorflinger E, Dowling M, Dowling M, Dragicevic N, Dricot L, Duchesne S, Duff
K, Dukart J, Durazzo T, Dutta J, DWors R, Egefjord L, Elcoroaristizabal X,
Emahazion T, Emahazion T, Endres C, Epstein N, Ereshefsky L, Eskildsen S,
Espinosa A, Esposito M, Ewers M, Ewers M, Falcone G, Fan J, Fan Y, Fan Z, Fang Z,
Farahibozorg S, Farahmandpoor Z, Farb N, Fardo D, Farias S, Farnum M, Farrer L,
Fatke B, Faux N, Favilla S, Fazlollahi A, Feldman B, Félix Z, Fennema-Notestine
C, Fernandes M, Fernandez S, Fernandez E, Ferrari R, Ferrer E, Fetterman B,
Figurski M, Fillit H, Finch S, Finger E, Fiot JB, Flenniken D, Fletcher E, Flores
C, Flynn Longmire C, Focke N, Forsythe A, Fox A, Fox A, Foxhall S, Franko E,
Frederick B, Freeman R, Freire R, Friedrich CM, Friesenhahn M, Frisoni G,
Fritzsche K, Fujiwara K, Fullerton T, Gaffour Y, Galbraith S, Galvin B, Gamst A, 
Gan K, Gao S, Garcia G, Garg G, Gaser C, Gastineau E, Gattaz W, Gaubert M,
Gaudreau A, Gauthier S, Gavidia G, Gemme G, Geraci J, Gholipour F, Ghosh S, Ghosh
D, Gieschke R, Gill R, Gillespie W, Gispert JD, Gitelman D, Gkontra X, Gleason C,
Glymour MM, Godbey M, Gold B, Goldberg T, Goldman J, Gomar J, Gonzalez-Beltran A,
Gore C, Gorriz JM, Goto M, Gou JI, Gradkowski W, Grasela T, Gray K, Gregory E,
Greicius M, Grill J, Grolmusz V, Gross A, Gross A, Grydeland H, Guignot I,
Guillaume B, Guilloux F, Guo LH, Guo H, Gupta V, Gurney G, Guyot J, Haas M,
Habeck C, Habte F, Haight T, Hajaj C, Hajiesmaeili M, Hajjar I, Hammarstrom P,
Han Z, Han D, Hanna Y, Hanna-Pladdy B, Hao Y, Hardy P, Harrison J, Harvey D,
Harvey D, Hassanzadeh O, Hayashi T, Haynes JD, He Y, He H, Head D, Heckemann R,
Heegaard N, Heidarieh SM, Heidebrink J, Hellyer P, Helwig M, Henderson D, Herholz
K, Hess C, Hill S, Hisaka A, Ho Ming AY, Hobart J, Hochstetler H, Hofer S,
Hoffman J, Holder D, Hollingworth P, Holmes R, Hong L, Hong H, Hong Q, Honigberg 
L, Hoogenraad F, Hope T, Hot T, Hsieh H, Hsu A, Hu M, Hu W, Hu X, Hu C, Hua WY,
Huang X, Huang CJ, Huang Y, Huang J, Huang Z, Huentelman M, Huppertz HJ, Hurt S, 
Hussain M, Hutchins J, Hwang S, Hyun J, Ifeachor E, Iglesias M, Ikari Y,
Ikonomidou V, Iman A, Imani F, Inlow M, Inoue L, Insel P, Irizarry M, Ishibashi
T, Ishii K, Ito K, Iwatsubo T, Jacks A, Jacobson M, Jacqmin P, Jaeger M, Jaeger
P, Jagger R, Jagust W, Janousova E, Jara H, Jedynak B, Jefferson A, Jenq J, Jiang
T, Jiang C, Jiao Y, Jiaolong Q, Jin K, Johnson S, Johnson J, Johnson K, Jones R, 
Jones G, Jones M, Joshi R, Joshi S, Joshi A, Jouvent E, Juengling F, Jung W,
Junjie Z, Muthamma KG, Kabilan M, Kairui Z, Kaludov N, Kam HJ, Kamakura V, Kamer 
A, Kanakaraj S, Kanchev V, Kaneko T, Kaneta T, Kang JH, Kang H, Kang J,
Karantzoulis S, Katz I, Kaushik SS, Kauwe J, Kauwe J, Kawashima S, Kaye E, Kazemi
S, Ke H, Kelleher T, Kennedy R, Keogh B, Kerchner G, Kerr D, Keshava N, Khalil A,
Khondker Z, Khondker Z, Kiddle S, Kihara T, Killeen N, Killiany R, Kim JH, Kim
JH, Kim D, Kim D, Kimberg D, King R, Kingery L, Kirby J, Kirsch W, Klein G,
Klimas M, Kline R, Klopfenstein E, Koen J, Koenig L, Koikkalainen J, Kokomoor A, 
Kong X, Kong X, Koppel J, Korolev I, Kotamarti RM, Krahnke T, Krams M, Kraybill
M, Kuceyeski A, Kuceyeski A, Kumar V, Kumar Roy P, Kuo J, Kyrtsos CR, Labib V,
Labrish C, Lai S, Lakatos A, Lalonde F, Lam SC, Landau S, Lane B, Langbaum J,
Langford D, Lanius V, Lasch S, Latella M, Lau H, Leatherday C, Lebedev A, Lee S, 
Lee Ja, Lee D, Lee G, Legal S, Lei H, Lemaitre H, Lenfant P, Leonards U, Leong J,
Leoutsakos JM, Leung YY, Leung K, Levey A, Li M, Li L, Li J, Li Y, Li M, Li J, Li
Y, Li Y, Li J, Li W, Li X, Li R, Li Q, Liang K, Liang P, Liao S, Liao W, Liaquat 
S, Liaw C, Liberman G, Lilley P, Lim JS, Lin F, Lin X, Linninger A, Liu S, Liu X,
Liu G, Liu Y, Liu Y, Liu T, Liu L, Liu M, Liu T, Liu W, Liu C, Liu T, Liu Y, Liu 
X, Liu T, Liu H, Liu D, Liu X, Liu Y, Llido J, Lo R, Lobach I, Lobanov V,
Lockhart A, Long X, Long Z, Long M, Looi J, Lu Y, Lu PH, Lu H, Lucena N, Luis J, 
Lukas C, Lukic A, Luo X, Luo S, Luo L, Luo W, Luo X, Ma SL, Ma SM, Mackin S, Mada
M, Madabhushi A, Madeira S, Magland J, Mahanta MS, Maikusa N, Maldjian J, Malpas 
C, Mandal I, Mandal P, Mang A, Mangin JF, Manjon J, Mantri N, Manzour A, Marcus
D, Margolin R, Marrett S, Marshall G, Martinez Gonzalez A, Martinez Torteya A,
Martins R, Mather M, Mathis C, Matoug S, Mattei P, Matthews D, Mattis P,
McCarroll S, McConathy J, McDonald C, McEvoy L, McGeown W, McGinnis S, McGonigle 
J, Randal McIntosh A, McIntyre J, McLaren D, McMillan C, McQuail J, Meadowcroft
M, Meda S, Melie-Garcia L, Melrose R, Mendelson A, Mendez M, Menendez E, Meng M, 
Meng M, Meredith J, Meyer M, Meyer C, Mez J, Mickael G, Mikula M, Miller M,
Millikin C, Mintun M, Mitchell M, Mitsis E, Mon A, Moore D, Morabito FC, Birgani 
PM, Moratal D, Morimoto B, Morris J, Morris J, Mortamet B, Moscato P,
Mourao-Miranda J, Mueller S, Mueller K, Mukherjee S, Mukund N, Mulder E, Mungas
D, Munir K, Murayama S, Murphy K, Sairam N, Nagata K, Nair A, Narayana P,
Nasrabadi S, Nativio R, Nazeri A, Nejad L, Nekooei S, Nemeth I, Nencka A,
Nettiksimmons J, Neu S, Ng YB, Nguyen N, Nguyen H, Nichols T, Niecko T, Nielsen
C, Niethammer M, Nishio T, Noda A, Nordstrom M, Noshad S, Notomi K, Novak N,
Nutakki GC, O'Charoen S, Obisesan T, Oh J, Okonkwo O, Rikkert MO, Oliveira J,
Oliveira A, Oliver R, Olmos S, Oltra J, Ong R, Osadebey M, Osadebey M,
Ostrowitzki S, Ovando Vazquez CM, Overholser R, Anishiya P, Chitra PK, Pa J, Pa
J, Palanisamy P, Pan S, Pan G, Pan Z, Pande Y, Pardo J, Pardoe H, Park H, Park L,
Park J, Park S, Parker C, Patel Y, Patil M, Patil A, Pawlak M, Payoux P, Pennec
X, Pereira F, Perlbarg V, Perneczky R, Peters F, Petitti D, Petrella J, Petrou M,
Peyrat JM, Pham Ngoc PT, Phillips J, Phillips N, Pian WT, Pierson R, Piovezan M, 
Pipitone J, Pirraglia E, Planes X, Podhorski A, Poirier J, Pomara N, Popov V,
Poppenkv J, Potkin S, Potter G, Poulin S, Prastawa M, Prince J, Priya K,
Pruessner J, Qiu W, Qu A, Qualls CD, Quarg P, Quinlan J, Rabbia M, Rajagovindan
R, Rajeesh R, Ramadubramani V, Ramage A, Ramirez A, Randolph C, Rao A, Rao H,
Reed B, Reid A, Reilhac A, Reiner P, Reinsberger C, Reiss P, Ren J, Retico A,
Rhatigan L, Rhinn H, Rhoades E, Ribbens A, Richard E, Richards J, Richter M,
Riddle W, Ridgway G, Ringman J, Rizk-Jackson A, Rizzi M, Rodriguez N, Rodriguez
L, Rodriguez-Vieitez E, Rogalski E, Rojas Balderrama J, Rokicki J, Romero K,
Rosand J, Rosen O, Rostant O, Rousseau F, Roy M, Rubright J, Rucinski M, Ruiz A, 
Rulseh A, Rusinek H, Ryan L, Sabuncu M, Saculva M, Sahuquillo J, Said Y, Saito N,
Sakata M, Salama M, Salazar D, Saman S, Sanchez L, Sanders E, Sankar T, Santhamma
S, Sarwinda D, Sasaki T, Sasaya T, Sato H, Sattlecker M, Savio A, Saykin A,
Scanlon B, Scharre D, Schegerin M, Schmand B, Schmansky N, Schmidt-Wilcke T,
Schneider B, Schott J, Schramm H, Schuerch M, Schultz T, Schwartz E, Schwartz P, 
Schwarz J, Schwarz A, Schweizer T, Selnes P, Sembritzki K, Senjem M, Sfikas G,
Sghedoni R, Shah JH, Shahbaba B, Shams S, Shankle W, Shattuck D, Shaw L, Shen J, 
Shen Q, Shen J, Shen Q, Shera D, Sherer E, Sherman M, Sherva R, Shi J, Shi Y, Shi
Y, Shi F, Shilaskar S, Shinohara R, Shokouhi S, Shulman J, Sideris K, Siegel R,
Silveira M, Silverman D, Simak A, Simmons A, Simoes R, Simon H, Simon A, Simonson
A, Simpson D, Simpson I, Singh L, Singh N, Sinha N, Siuciak J, Sjögren N, Skinner
J, Skudlarski P, Smith M, Smith C, Snyder P, Soares H, Soldan A, Soldea O,
Solomon A, Som S, Song S, Song Z, Sosova I, Sotolongo-Grau O, Soydemir M,
Spampinato MV, Speier W, Sperling R, Spiegel R, Spies L, Springate B, Spychalla
A, Staff R, Steenland N, Steffener J, Stern Y, Stokman H, Stolzenberg E, Stricker
N, Stühler E, Su S, Subramaniam R, Suen S, Sugishita M, Suk HI, Suk HI, Sukkar R,
Sullivan J, Summers D, Sun H, Sun M, Sun Y, Sun Y, Sun J, Sundell K, Sutphen C,
Svetnik V, Swamy Y, Swan M, Symons S, Szafranska K, Szigeti K, Szoeke C, Sørensen
L, Genish T, Takeuchi T, Tanaka R, Tanaka S, Tanchi C, Tancredi D, Tang Q, Tanzi 
R, Tarnow E, Tartaglia MC, Tarver E, Tassy D, Tauber C, Taylor-Reinwald L, Teipel
S, Teng E, Termenon M, Terriza F, Thambisetty M, Thames A, Thatavarti RS, Thiele 
F, Thomas B, Thomas R, Thomas C, Thomas C, Thompson P, Thompson P, Thompson W,
Thompson J, Thornton-Wells T, Thorvaldsson V, Till H, Tokuda T, Toledo JB, Toma
A, Tomita N, Toro R, Torrealdea P, Toschi N, Tosto G, Tosun D, Toussaint P,
Toyoshiba H, Tractenberg RE, Triggs T, Trittschuh E, Trotta G, Truong Huu T,
Truran D, Tsalikakis D, Tsanas A, Tsang C, Tufail A, Tung J, Turken A, Turner R, 
Tyagi P, Ueda Y, Uematsu D, Ullrich L, Umar N, Ungar L, Valenzuela O, Van de Nes 
J, van der Lijn F, Van Hecke W, Van Horn J, Van Leemput K, Van Train K, Varaganti
R, Varkuti B, Vasanawala M, Veeraraghavan H, Vellay S, Vemuri P, Verma M, Vinke
L, Vinyes G, Visser PJ, Vitek M, Vogel S, Voineskos A, Vos S, Vounou M, Wade S,
Walsh A, Wang A, Wang T, Wang S, Wang DJ, Wang J, Wang Z, Wang X, Wang Z, Wang Y,
Wang YM, Wang LS, Wang Z, Wang L, Wang T, Wang J, Wang L, Wang S, Wang L, Ward M,
Ward A, Watson D, Wefel J, Weiner M, Wenzel F, Wesnes K, Westaway S, Westlye LT, 
Wheland D, Whitcher B, White B, Whitlow C, Wilhelmsen K, Wilmot B, Wilson L,
Wingo T, Wirth M, Wishart H, Wiste H, Wittemer E, Wolf H, Wolke I, Wolz R, Wong
T, Wong K, Woo J, Woo E, Woods L, Worth A, Wu L, Wu X, Wu Y, Wyman B, Xie S, Xu
S, Xu S, Xu Y, Xu J, Yamada T, Yamashita F, Yan Y, Yang Z, Yang JJ, Yang HD, Yang
E, Yang CY, Yang E, Yang H, Yang W, Yassa M, Yatsubo S, Yavorsky C, Ye BS, Yee L,
Yokoyama J, Yokoyama T, Young S, Younhyun J, Yu CQ, Yu P, Yuan Y, Yuen B,
Yushkevich P, Zaborszky L, Zagorodnov V, Zahodne L, Zarei M, Zeimpekis K, Zeitzer
J, Zelinski E, Zeskind B, Zhan S, Zhang Z, Zhang T, Zhang J, Zhang Z, Zhang X,
Zhang Y, Zhang D, Zhang L, Zhang K, Zhang L, Zhang M, Zhang P, Zhao P, Zhao X,
Zhijun Y, Zhou L, Zhou B, Zhou Y, Zhu L, Zhu Z, Zhu H, Zhu X, Ziegler G, Zilka S,
Zisserman A, Zito G, Zito G, Zu C, Zulfigar A.

Defining cases and controls on the basis of biomarkers rather than clinical
diagnosis may reduce sample sizes required for genetic studies. The aim of this
study was to assess whether characterizing case/control status on the basis of
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) profile would increase power to replicate known genetic
associations for Alzheimer's disease (AD). Independent of clinical diagnosis,
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) subjects with 2 CSF biomarkers
for AD (Aβ1-42 < 192 pg/mL and tau phosphorylated at threonine 181 (p-tau) > 23
pg/mL, "CSF-positive") were compared with those without CSF evidence for AD
(Aβ1-42 > 192 pg/mL and 181-phosphorylated tau < 23 pg/mL, "CSF-negative"). Minor
allele frequency (MAF) and odds ratios (ORs) between these 2 groups were
calculated for 7 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of interest. Two hundred 
thirty-two individuals were CSF-positive and 94 CSF-negative. There were no
differences in age (74.7 ± 7.2 vs. 75.0 ± 6.5 years, p = 0.7), but significant
differences in Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE) (25.9 ± 2.6 vs. 28.2 ± 1.7, p
< 0.001) between the CSF-positive and CSF-negative groups. Significant
differences in MAF (p < 0.05, uncorrected) were seen for CR1 (rs1408077; OR,
1.59; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.01-2.49), PICALM (rs541458; OR, 0.68, 95%
CI, 0.47-0.98), TOMM40 (rs2075650; OR, 4.30; 95% CI, 2.61-7.06); and possession
of 1 or more APOE ε4 alleles (OR, 9.84; 95% CI, 5.48-17.67). These results
suggest that using biomarkers of AD pathology to define case and control status
may increase power in genetic association studies.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3150628
PMID: 21459483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Hum Psychopharmacol. 2011 Jan;26(1):21-7.

Prolactin as a biomarker for treatment response and tardive dyskinesia in
schizophrenia subjects: old thoughts revisited from a genetic perspective.

Souza RP(1), Meltzer HY, Lieberman JA, Voineskos AN, Remington G, Kennedy JL.

Author information: 
(1)Neurogenetics Section, Neuroscience Department, Centre for Addiction and
Mental Health, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. renanrps@yahoo.com.br

Previous studies investigated whether prolactin (PRL) serum level was a biomarker
of antipsychotic response, schizophrenia symptomatology, and tardive dyskinesia. 
Most of the findings support that antipsychotic drugs modulate PRL levels but PRL
is not a steady indicator. Recent results suggest a genetic effect of PRL and PRL
receptor (PRLR) polymorphisms in PRL levels indicating that independently of
antipsychotic therapy subjects could have altered PRL levels due to their genetic
background.We evaluated whether PRL and PRLR variants were associated with
treatment outcome and tardive dyskinesia. We observed no association of PRL/PRLR 
polymorphism with treatment response (best genotypic results include PRL rs849885
and PRLR rs4703509 permuted p=0.326). Regarding tardive dyskinesia, the major
allele of PRL rs37364 was nominally associated with risk for tardive dyskinesia
in the European ancestry sub-sample (permuted p=0.183). Although we reported no
significant associations, it is definitely worthy of investigation to see if
together (genetic variants in the PRL system and PRL serum measures) could be a
reliable biomarker for antipsychotic response and TD prevalence. Our results
suggest that more studies in this context are required to shed light in the
molecular mechanisms underlying antipsychotic response and tardive dyskinesia
occurrence.

PMID: 21305610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2011 Feb;68(2):198-206. doi:
10.1001/archgenpsychiatry.2010.194.

The brain-derived neurotrophic factor Val66Met polymorphism and prediction of
neural risk for Alzheimer disease.

Voineskos AN(1), Lerch JP, Felsky D, Shaikh S, Rajji TK, Miranda D, Lobaugh NJ,
Mulsant BH, Pollock BG, Kennedy JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Geriatric Mental Health Program, Centre for
Addiction and Mental Health, 250 College St, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5T 1R8.
aristotle_voineskos@camh.net

CONTEXT: The brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) Val66Met (rs6265)
polymorphism may predict the risk of Alzheimer disease (AD). However, genetic
association studies of the BDNF gene with AD have produced equivocal results.
Imaging-genetics strategies may clarify the manner in which BDNF gene variation
predicts the risk of AD via characterization of its effects on at-risk structures
or neural networks susceptible in this disorder.
OBJECTIVE: To determine whether the BDNF Val66Met gene variant interacts with age
to predict brain and cognitive measures in healthy volunteers across the adult
lifespan in an intermediate phenotype pattern related to AD by examining (1)
cortical thickness, (2) fractional anisotropy of white matter tracts (ie, white
matter integrity), and (3) episodic memory performance.
DESIGN: A cross-sectional study using genetics, high-resolution magnetic
resonance imaging, diffusion tensor imaging, and cognitive testing in healthy
individuals spanning the adult lifespan.
SETTING: University hospital.
PARTICIPANTS: A total of 69 healthy volunteers ranging from 19 to 82 years of
age.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: The BDNF Val66Met genotype, apolipoprotein E genotype,
cortical thickness, microstructural integrity of white matter tracts, and
episodic memory performance were evaluated.
RESULTS: The BDNF Val66Met polymorphism interacted with age to predict (1)
cortical thickness (prominently at the entorhinal cortex and temporal gyri), (2) 
fractional anisotropy of white matter tracts (prominently at white matter tracts 
connecting to the medial temporal lobe), and (3) episodic memory performance. For
each of these findings, the pattern was similar: valine/valine individuals in
late life were susceptible, and in early adult life, methionine allele carriers
demonstrated susceptibility.
CONCLUSIONS: The BDNF gene confers risk in an age-dependent manner on the brain
structures and cognitive functions that are consistent with the neural circuitry 
vulnerable in the earliest stages of AD. Our novel findings provide convergent
evidence in vivo for a BDNF genetic mechanism of susceptibility in an
intermediate phenotype related to AD.

PMID: 21300947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Pharmacogenomics J. 2012 Jun;12(3):260-6. doi: 10.1038/tpj.2010.93. Epub 2011 Jan
25.

Association study of cannabinoid receptor 1 (CNR1) gene in tardive dyskinesia.

Tiwari AK(1), Zai CC, Likhodi O, Voineskos AN, Meltzer HY, Lieberman JA, Potkin
SG, Remington G, Müller DJ, Kennedy JL.

Author information: 
(1)Neurogenetics Section, Neuroscience Department, Centre for Addiction and
Mental Health, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Tardive dyskinesia (TD) is a severe, debilitating movement disorder observed in
25-30% of the patients treated with typical antipsychotics. Cannabinoid receptor 
1 (CNR1) activators tend to inhibit movement, an effect prevented by rimonabant
and other selective CNR1 antagonists. Furthermore, CNR1 receptor is downregulated
in Huntington's disease and upregulated in Parkinson's disease. Twenty tagSNPs
spanning the CNR1 gene were analyzed in schizophrenia patients of European
ancestry (n=191; 74 with TD). Significant genotypic (P=0.012) and allelic
(P=0.012) association was observed with rs806374 (T>C). Carriers of the CC
genotype were more likely to be TD positive (CC vs TT+TC, odds ratio=3.4
(1.5-7.8), P=0.003) and had more severe TD (CC vs TT+TC; 9.52±9.2 vs 5.62±6.9,
P=0.046). These results indicate a possible role of CNR1 in the development of TD
in our patient population. However, these observations are marginal after
correcting for multiple testing and need to be replicated in a larger patient
population.

PMID: 21266946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Biol Psychiatry. 2010 Nov 1;68(9):825-31. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2010.06.021.
Epub 2010 Aug 12.

The role of the corpus callosum in transcranial magnetic stimulation induced
interhemispheric signal propagation.

Voineskos AN(1), Farzan F, Barr MS, Lobaugh NJ, Mulsant BH, Chen R, Fitzgerald
PB, Daskalakis ZJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Department of Psychiatry, University
of Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

BACKGROUND: The corpus callosum, the main interhemispheric connection in the
brain, may serve to preserve functional asymmetry between homologous cortical
regions.
METHODS: To test this hypothesis, 30 healthy adult subjects underwent combined
transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS)-electroencephalography procedures.
Nineteen of these subjects also completed diffusion tensor imaging and
tractography procedures. We examined the relationship between microstructural
integrity of subdivisions of the corpus callosum with TMS-induced
interhemispheric signal propagation.
RESULTS: We found a significant inverse relationship between microstructural
integrity of callosal motor fibers with TMS-induced interhemispheric signal
propagation from left to right motor cortex. We also found a significant inverse 
relationship between microstructural integrity of genu fibers of the corpus
callosum and TMS-induced interhemispheric signal propagation from left to right
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC). We then demonstrated neuroanatomic
specificity of these relationships.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, our findings suggest that TMS-induced
interhemispheric signal propagation is transcallosally mediated and
neuroanatomically specific and support a role for the corpus callosum in
preservation of functional asymmetry between homologous cortical regions.
Delineation of the relationship between corpus callosum microstructure and
interhemispheric signal propagation in neuropsychiatric disorders, such as
schizophrenia, may reveal novel mechanisms of pathophysiology.

Copyright © 2010 Society of Biological Psychiatry. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 20708172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol. 2010 Oct;20(10):688-94. doi:
10.1016/j.euroneuro.2010.05.002. Epub 2010 Jun 3.

Association study of the GSK-3B gene with tardive dyskinesia in European
Caucasians.

Souza RP(1), Remington G, Chowdhury NI, Lau MK, Voineskos AN, Lieberman JA,
Meltzer HY, Kennedy JL.

Author information: 
(1)Neurogenetics Section, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada. renanrps@yahoo.com.br

There is solid evidence of a genetic predisposition to tardive dyskinesia (TD)
although the pathophysiological mechanisms of TD are still unclear. Nevertheless,
the dopamine overactivity hypothesis of the TD etiology receives support from
both pharmacological and physiological evidence. Dopaminergic signaling modulates
the glycogen synthase kinase 3B (GSK-3B), a kinase that may play a critical role 
in the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases. GSK-3B is an essential element
of the apoptotic signaling cascade induced by oxidative stress, which may be
involved in TD pathogenesis. We investigated whether GSK-3B polymorphisms
(rs11919783, rs6805251, rs7624540, rs6438552, rs4072520, rs9878473, rs6779828 and
rs3755557) selected using tagging method were associated with TD manifestation
and abnormal involuntary movement severity. We evaluated 215 schizophrenia
subjects from whom 169 were European Caucasians. All eight evaluated variants had
their minor allele carriers consistently showing lower risk to TD and lower
Abnormal Involuntary Movement Scale. The rs6805251, rs6438552 and rs9878473
variants showed a trend for association with TD in European Caucasian subjects
(permuted p=0.07). Furthermore, all tested markers showed p< or =0.0007 after we 
incorporated age as covariate in the analysis of the abnormal involuntary
movement severity. Our results suggest that GSK-3B polymorphism may play a role
in the genetic vulnerability to TD manifestation in schizophrenia subjects with
European Caucasian background further implicating polymorphisms in the dopamine
D2-like receptor signaling in this context. These findings should be read with
caution particularly before independent replication.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier B.V. and ENCP. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20605420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. World J Biol Psychiatry. 2010 Sep;11(6):803-12. doi:
10.3109/15622975.2010.486043.

The catechol-O-methyl-transferase gene in tardive dyskinesia.

Zai CC(1), Tiwari AK, Müller DJ, De Luca V, Shinkai T, Shaikh S, Ni X, Sibony D, 
Voineskos AN, Meltzer HY, Lieberman JA, Potkin SG, Remington G, Kennedy JL.

Author information: 
(1)Neurogenetics Section, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada.

Tardive dyskinesia (TD) is a severe and potentially irreversible motor side
effect linked to long-term antipsychotic exposure. Changes in dopamine
neurotransmission have been implicated in the etiology of TD, and
catechol-O-methyl-transferase (COMT) is an enzyme that metabolizes
dopamine.OBJECTIVES: We investigated five single-nucleotide polymorphisms in
addition to the functional Val158Met variant spanning the COMT gene for
association with TD.
METHODS: We analyzed the six COMT single-nucleotide polymorphisms in a sample of 
schizophrenia/schizoaffective disorder patients (n=226; 196 Caucasians and 30
African Americans).
RESULTS: We found a significant association between the marker rs165599 in the 3'
untranslated region of COMT and TD (AA versus G-carrier: OR(AA)=2.22, 95%
CI:1.23-4.03; P=0.007). The association appeared to be originating from males. We
did not find a significant association of the other five tested polymorphisms
with TD in our samples. We performed a sex-stratified meta-analysis across all of
the published studies (n=6 plus our own data) of COMT and TD, and found an
association between ValVal genotype and TD in females (OR(ValVal)=1.63, 95% CI:
1.09-2.45; P=0.019) but not in males.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, our results suggest that the COMT gene may have a minor but
consistent role in TD, although sex-stratified studies with additional markers in
larger clinical samples should be performed.

PMID: 20586531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Neurobiol Aging. 2012 Jan;33(1):21-34. doi: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2010.02.009.
Epub 2010 Apr 3.

Age-related decline in white matter tract integrity and cognitive performance: a 
DTI tractography and structural equation modeling study.

Voineskos AN(1), Rajji TK, Lobaugh NJ, Miranda D, Shenton ME, Kennedy JL, Pollock
BG, Mulsant BH.

Author information: 
(1)Geriatric Mental Health Program, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health,
Department of Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Age-related decline in microstructural integrity of certain white matter tracts
may explain cognitive decline associated with normal aging. Whole brain
tractography and a clustering segmentation in 48 healthy individuals across the
adult lifespan were used to examine: interhemispheric (corpus callosum),
intrahemispheric association (cingulum, uncinate, arcuate, inferior longitudinal,
inferior occipitofrontal), and projection (corticospinal) fibers. Principal
components analysis reduced cognitive tests into 6 meaningful factors: (1) memory
and executive function; (2) visuomotor dexterity; (3) motor speed; (4) attention 
and working memory; (5) set-shifting/flexibility; and (6) visuospatial
construction. Using theory-based structural equation modeling, relationships
among age, white matter tract integrity, and cognitive performance were
investigated. Parsimonious model fit demonstrated relationships where decline in 
white matter integrity may explain age-related decline in cognitive performance: 
inferior longitudinal fasciculus (ILF) with visuomotor dexterity; the inferior
occipitofrontal fasciculus with visuospatial construction; and posterior fibers
(i.e., splenium) of the corpus callosum with memory and executive function. Our
findings suggest that decline in the microstructural integrity of white matter
fibers can account for cognitive decline in normal aging.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2945445
PMID: 20363050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Brain. 2010 May;133(Pt 5):1494-504. doi: 10.1093/brain/awq040. Epub 2010 Mar 17.

Diffusion tensor tractography findings in schizophrenia across the adult
lifespan.

Voineskos AN(1), Lobaugh NJ, Bouix S, Rajji TK, Miranda D, Kennedy JL, Mulsant
BH, Pollock BG, Shenton ME.

Author information: 
(1)Geriatric Mental Health Program, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health,
Department of Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Toronto M5T 1R8, Canada.
aristotle_voineskos@camh.net

In healthy adult individuals, late life is a dynamic time of change with respect 
to the microstructural integrity of white matter tracts. Yet, elderly individuals
are generally excluded from diffusion tensor imaging studies in schizophrenia.
Therefore, we examined microstructural integrity of frontotemporal and
interhemispheric white matter tracts in schizophrenia across the adult lifespan. 
Diffusion tensor imaging data from 25 younger schizophrenic patients (< or = 55
years), 25 younger controls, 25 older schizophrenic patients (> or = 56 years)
and 25 older controls were analysed. Patients with schizophrenia in each group
were individually matched to controls. Whole-brain tractography and clustering
segmentation were employed to isolate white matter tracts. Groups were compared
using repeated measures analysis of variance with 12 within-group measures of
fractional anisotropy: (left and right) uncinate fasciculus, arcuate fasciculus, 
inferior longitudinal fasciculus, inferior occipito-frontal fasciculus, cingulum 
bundle, and genu and splenium of the corpus callosum. For each white matter
tract, fractional anisotropy was then regressed against age in patients and
controls, and correlation coefficients compared. The main effect of group
(F(3,92) = 12.2, P < 0.001), and group by tract interactions (F(26,832) = 1.68, P
= 0.018) were evident for fractional anisotropy values. Younger patients had
significantly lower fractional anisotropy than younger controls
(Bonferroni-corrected alpha = 0.0042) in the left uncinate fasciculus (t(48) =
3.7, P = 0.001) and right cingulum bundle (t(48) = 3.6, P = 0.001), with
considerable effect size, but the older groups did not differ. Schizophrenic
patients did not demonstrate accelerated age-related decline compared with
healthy controls in any white matter tract. To our knowledge, this is the first
study to examine the microstructural integrity of frontotemporal white matter
tracts across the adult lifespan in schizophrenia. The left uncinate fasciculus
and right cingulum bundle are disrupted in younger chronic patients with
schizophrenia compared with matched controls, suggesting that these white matter 
tracts are related to frontotemporal disconnectivity. The absence of accelerated 
age-related decline, or differences between older community-dwelling patients and
controls, suggests that these patients may possess resilience to white matter
disruption.

PMCID: PMC2859148
PMID: 20237131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Front Psychiatry. 2010 Nov 22;1:140. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2010.00140. eCollection
2010.

Personality goes a long a way: an interhemispheric connectivity study.

Hoppenbrouwers SS(1), Farzan F, Barr MS, Voineskos AN, Schutter DJ, Fitzgerald
PB, Daskalakis ZJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Psychology, Utrecht University Utrecht,
Netherlands.

Throughout the development of psychology the delineation of personality has
played a central role. Together with the NEO-PI-R, a questionnaire derived from
the Five Factor Model of Personality, and recent advances in research technology 
it is now possible to investigate the relationship between personality features
and neurophysiological brain processes. The NEO-FFI, the short version of the
NEO-PI-R, reliably measures five main personality traits: Neuroticism,
Extraversion, Openness to experience, Agreeableness, and Conscientiousness. As
behavior and some psychiatric disorders have been related to interhemispheric
connectivity, the present study used the combination of transcranial magnetic
stimulation (TMS) and electroencephalography (EEG) to measure frontal
interhemispheric connectivity and its association with personality as indexed by 
the NEO-FFI. Results demonstrated that prefrontal interhemispheric connectivity
between the left and right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex correlates with
Agreeableness in healthy subjects. This is the first study to relate personality 
features to interhemispheric connectivity through TMS-EEG and suggests that
Agreeableness relates to the effectiveness of prefrontal communication between
hemispheres.

PMCID: PMC3059614
PMID: 21423449  [PubMed]


63. Psychiatr Genet. 2010 Feb;20(1):39-43. doi: 10.1097/YPG.0b013e3283351221.

Association of the orphan nuclear receptor NR4A1 with tardive dyskinesia.

Novak G(1), Gallo A, Zai CC, Meltzer HY, Lieberman JA, Potkin SG, Voineskos AN,
Remington G, Kennedy JL, Levesque D, Le Foll B.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Research Department, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Recent evidence has identified the NR4A1 (NUR77, NGFI-B) gene as a strong
candidate for involvement in tardive dyskinesia (TD). We have investigated the
association of six single nucleotide polymorphisms within the NR4A family of
genes with TD in a sample of 171 patients with schizophrenia of Caucasian
descent. The NR4A1 single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) marker rs2603751 showed a
nominal association with the risk of TD, as well as with the extent of TD based
on the Abnormal Involuntary Movements Scale (AIMS) scores. The haplotype
generated by the markers rs2603751 and rs2701124 also showed association with TD 
and, after adjustment for multiple testing, both the NR4A1 marker rs2603751 and
the haplotype continued to show a trend toward association with TD. Although the 
results of this study are limited by a small sample size, it presents important
pilot data and warrants further investigation of the involvement of NR4A1
variants in TD.

PMID: 20010315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2009 Dec;66(12):1304-12. doi:
10.1001/archgenpsychiatry.2009.156.

Brain monoamine oxidase A binding in major depressive disorder: relationship to
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor treatment, recovery, and recurrence.

Meyer JH(1), Wilson AA, Sagrati S, Miler L, Rusjan P, Bloomfield PM, Clark M,
Sacher J, Voineskos AN, Houle S.

Author information: 
(1)Vivian M. Rakoff PET Imaging Centre, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health
and Department of Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5T 1R8,
Canada. jeff.meyer@camhpet.ca

CONTEXT: Highly significant elevations in regional brain monoamine oxidase A
(MAO-A) binding were recently reported during major depressive episodes (MDEs) of
major depressive disorder (MDD). The relationship between MAO-A levels and
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) treatment, recovery, and recurrence
in MDD is unknown.
OBJECTIVES: To determine whether brain MAO-A binding changes after SSRI
treatment, whether brain MAO-A binding normalizes in subjects with MDD in
recovery, and whether there is a relationship between prefrontal and anterior
cingulate cortex MAO-A binding in recovery and subsequent recurrence of MDE.
DESIGN: Case-control study.
SETTING: Tertiary care psychiatric hospital.
PARTICIPANTS: Twenty-eight healthy subjects, 16 subjects with an MDE secondary to
MDD, and 18 subjects with MDD in recovery underwent carbon 11-labeled harmine
positron emission tomography scans. Subjects with MDE were scanned before and
after 6 weeks of SSRI treatment. All were otherwise healthy, nonsmoking, and
medication free. Subjects with MDD in recovery were followed up for 6 months
after MAO-A binding measurement.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE: Monoamine oxidase A V(T), an index of MAO-A density, was
measured in the prefrontal cortex, anterior cingulate cortex, posterior cingulate
cortex, dorsal putamen, ventral striatum, thalamus, anterior temporal cortex,
midbrain, and hippocampus.
RESULTS: Monoamine oxidase A V(T) was significantly elevated in each brain region
both during MDE and after SSRI treatment as compared with healthy controls.
During recovery, MAO-A V(T) was significantly elevated in each brain region;
however, those who went on to recurrence had significantly higher MAO-A V(T) in
the prefrontal and anterior cingulate cortex than those who did not.
CONCLUSIONS: Elevated MAO-A binding after SSRI treatment indicates persistence of
a monoamine-lowering process not present in health. This provides a strong
conceptual rationale for continuing SSRI treatment during early remission.
Greater MAO-A binding in the prefrontal and anterior cingulate cortex in subjects
with MDD in recovery and its association with subsequent recurrence argue that
deficient monoamine neuromodulation may persist into recovery and contribute to
recurrence.

PMID: 19996035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2010 Feb 1;34(1):50-6. doi:
10.1016/j.pnpbp.2009.09.020. Epub 2009 Sep 22.

Oxidative stress in tardive dyskinesia: genetic association study and
meta-analysis of NADPH quinine oxidoreductase 1 (NQO1) and Superoxide dismutase 2
(SOD2, MnSOD) genes.

Zai CC(1), Tiwari AK, Basile V, de Luca V, Müller DJ, Voineskos AN, Remington G, 
Meltzer HY, Lieberman JA, Potkin SG, Kennedy JL.

Author information: 
(1)Neurogenetics Section, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, 250 College
Street, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5T 1R8.

INTRODUCTION: Tardive dyskinesia (TD) is a potentially irreversible side effect
of antipsychotic medication treatment that occurs in approximately 25% of
chronically treated schizophrenia patients. Oxidative stress has been one of the 
proposed mechanisms influencing TD risk. Pae et al. (2004) originally reported a 
significant association between TD and the NADPH quinine oxidoreductase 1 (NQO1) 
gene Pro187Ser (C609T, rs1800566) polymorphism in Korean schizophrenia patients; 
however, subsequent studies have not consistently replicated these findings.
Similarly, Hori et al. (2000) reported an association between TD and the
Manganese superoxide dismutase SOD2 (MnSOD) gene Ala9Val (rs4880) polymorphism in
a Japanese sample, but most research groups failed to replicate their positive
findings.
AIMS: We investigated the role of the NQO1 polymorphism Pro187Ser and SOD2
(Ala9Val) in a group of well-characterized schizophrenia patients (N=223)
assessed for TD. We also performed a meta-analysis of all the previously
published TD studies, including data from our sample, on these polymorphisms,
Pro187Ser (N=5 studies) and Ala9Val (N=9 studies).
RESULTS: We did not observe a significant association of the Pro187Ser or Ala9Val
polymorphism with TD occurrence or AIMS scores in our Caucasian and African
American samples when analyzed independently. Meta-analysis did not reveal a
significant association of the Pro187Ser/Ala9Val alleles or genotypes with TD
occurrence.
CONCLUSIONS: Neither the NQO1 Pro187Ser nor the SOD2 Ala9Val appear to play a
major role in TD risk, although additional polymorphisms should be tested before 
the role of NQO1 and SOD2 in TD can be completely excluded.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19778569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. J Neurosci. 2009 Apr 22;29(16):5045-7. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0477-09.2009.

Converging evidence for the Nogo-66 receptor gene in schizophrenia.

Voineskos AN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Science, School of Graduate Studies, University of
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario MST 1R8, Canada. aristotle.voineskos@utoronto.ca

Comment on
    J Neurosci. 2008 Dec 3;28(49):13161-72.

PMID: 19386899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Pharmacogenomics J. 2009 Jun;9(3):168-74. doi: 10.1038/tpj.2009.2. Epub 2009 Feb 
24.

Association study of tardive dyskinesia and five DRD4 polymorphisms in
schizophrenia patients.

Zai CC(1), Tiwari AK, Basile V, De Luca V, Müller DJ, King N, Voineskos AN,
Remington G, Meltzer HY, Lieberman JA, Potkin SG, Kennedy JL.

Author information: 
(1)Neurogenetics Section, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada.

Tardive dyskinesia (TD) is a side effect of chronic antipsychotic medication
exposure. Abnormalities in dopaminergic activity in the nigro-striatal system
have been most often suggested to be involved because the agents that cause TD
share in common potent antagonism of dopamine D(2) receptors (DRD2). Thus, a
number of studies have focused on the association of dopamine system gene
polymorphisms and TD, with the most consistent findings being an association
between TD and the Ser9Gly polymorphism of the DRD3 gene and the TaqIA site 3' of
the DRD2 gene. The DRD4 gene codes for the third member of the D(2)-like dopamine
receptor family, and the variable number tandem-repeat polymorphism in exon 3 of 
DRD4 has been associated with TD. However, other polymorphisms have not been
thoroughly examined. In this study, we investigated five polymorphisms spanning
the DRD4 gene and their association with TD in our European Caucasian sample
(N=171). Although the exon 3 variable number tandem repeat was not associated
with TD, haplotypes consisting of four tag polymorphisms were associated with TD 
in males. This study suggests that DRD4 may be involved in TD in the Caucasian
population, although further replication studies are needed.

PMID: 19238168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol. 2009 May;19(5):317-28. doi:
10.1016/j.euroneuro.2009.01.001. Epub 2009 Feb 13.

Genetic study of BDNF, DRD3, and their interaction in tardive dyskinesia.

Zai CC(1), Tiwari AK, De Luca V, Müller DJ, Bulgin N, Hwang R, Zai GC, King N,
Voineskos AN, Meltzer HY, Lieberman JA, Potkin SG, Remington G, Kennedy JL.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Tardive dyskinesia (TD) is a neuroleptic-induced movement disorder. Its
pathophysiology is unclear. The most consistent genetic findings have shown an
association with the Ser9Gly polymorphism of the DRD3 gene. However, only few
polymorphisms within DRD3 has been tested, and a comprehensive examination of
DRD3 in TD is still lacking. Further, brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), a
neuronal growth and survival peptide, regulates DRD3 expression and may be
involved in the neuronal degeneration observed in TD. In the present study, we
investigated 15 tag DRD3 polymorphisms and four tag BDNF polymorphisms for
association with TD in our sample of Caucasian schizophrenia patients (N=171).
While BDNF markers showed no association, a haplotype containing rs3732782,
rs905568, and rs7620754 in the 5' region of DRD3 was associated with TD diagnosis
(p[10,000 permutations]=0.007). We also found evidence of interaction between
BDNF and DRD3 polymorphisms. Further studies are needed to confirm these
findings.

PMID: 19217756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. J Neural Transm (Vienna). 2009 Apr;116(4):479-86. doi: 10.1007/s00702-008-0182-9.
Epub 2009 Jan 28.

Neuregulin 1 and age of onset in the major psychoses.

Voineskos D(1), De Luca V, Macgregor S, Likhodi O, Miller L, Voineskos AN,
Kennedy JL.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, 250 College Street, R-30, Toronto, ON,
M5T 1R8, Canada.

Genetic vulnerability to psychiatric illness extends across major psychiatric
illness. Neuregulin 1 (NRG1) is a large gene on chromosome 8p, that has been
identified as a susceptibility factor in bipolar disorder and schizophrenia. In
particular, a core at risk haplotype has received considerable attention for a
putative role in the pathophysiology of the major psychoses (schizophrenia and
bipolar disorder). This core haplotype can be represented by three markers
478B14-848, 420M9-1395, and SNP8NRG221533. We genotyped 312 families with bipolar
probands, and 120 families with schizophrenia probands. Association of the core
haplotype was tested for with age-at-onset and with three phenotypes: major
psychosis, schizophrenia, and bipolar disorder. Neither age of onset (P = 0.893) 
nor the major psychosis phenotype (P = 0.374) was associated with the core
haplotype in the overall sample. Ours was the first study to investigate the NRG1
core haplotype with age of onset of major psychoses, and despite our preliminary 
negative findings, this area deserves further investigation.

PMID: 19184335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Neuroimage. 2009 Apr 1;45(2):370-6. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2008.12.028. Epub
2008 Dec 29.

Quantitative examination of a novel clustering method using magnetic resonance
diffusion tensor tractography.

Voineskos AN(1), O'Donnell LJ, Lobaugh NJ, Markant D, Ameis SH, Niethammer M,
Mulsant BH, Pollock BG, Kennedy JL, Westin CF, Shenton ME.

Author information: 
(1)Geriatric Mental Health Program, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health,
Department of Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Canada.

MR diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) can measure and visualize organization of white
matter fibre tracts in vivo. DTI is a relatively new imaging technique, and new
tools developed for quantifying fibre tracts require evaluation. The purpose of
this study was to compare the reliability of a novel clustering approach with a
multiple region of interest (MROI) approach in both healthy and disease
(schizophrenia) populations. DTI images were acquired in 20 participants (n=10
patients with schizophrenia: 56+/-15 years; n=10 controls: 51+/-20 years) (1.5 T 
GE system) with diffusion gradients applied in 23 non-collinear directions,
repeated three times. Whole brain seeding and creation of fibre tracts were then 
performed. Interrater reliability of the clustering approach, and the MROI
approach, were each evaluated and the methods compared. There was high spatial
(voxel-based) agreement within and between the clustering and MROI methods.
Fractional anisotropy, trace, and radial and axial diffusivity values showed high
intraclass correlation (p<0.001 for all tracts) for each approach. Differences in
scalar indices of diffusion between the clustering and MROI approach were
minimal. The excellent interrater reliability of the clustering method and high
agreement with the MROI method, quantitatively and spatially, indicates that the 
clustering method can be used with confidence. The clustering method avoids
biases of ROI drawing and placement, and, not limited by a priori predictions,
may be a more robust and efficient way to identify and measure white matter
tracts of interest.

PMCID: PMC2646811
PMID: 19159690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Schizophr Res. 2008 Dec;106(2-3):248-52. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2008.08.036. Epub 
2008 Oct 5.

Genetic study of eight AKT1 gene polymorphisms and their interaction with DRD2
gene polymorphisms in tardive dyskinesia.

Zai CC(1), Romano-Silva MA, Hwang R, Zai GC, Deluca V, Müller DJ, King N,
Voineskos AN, Meltzer HY, Lieberman JA, Potkin SG, Remington G, Kennedy JL.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Tardive dyskinesia (TD) is a motor adverse effect of chronic antipsychotic
medication. It has been suggested to involve dopamine neurotransmission system
changes. AKT1 acts downstream of the D(2) receptor that is blocked by all
antipsychotics to some degree. The AKT1 gene has not been investigated in TD. We 
examined eight polymorphisms spanning the AKT1 gene and their association with TD
in our schizophrenia sample of 193 Caucasians, 76 of which with TD. AKT1
polymorphisms and haplotypes were not significantly associated with TD. However, 
we detected a significant interaction between rs6275 of DRD2 and rs3730358 of
AKT1 (p<1 x 10(-5)).

PMID: 18838251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Psychiatr Genet. 2008 Jun;18(3):143-6. doi: 10.1097/YPG.0b013e3282fa1874.

A family-based association study of the myelin-associated glycoprotein and
2',3'-cyclic nucleotide 3'-phosphodiesterase genes with schizophrenia.

Voineskos AN(1), de Luca V, Bulgin NL, van Adrichem Q, Shaikh S, Lang DJ, Honer
WG, Kennedy JL.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, University of Toronto, Toronto,
Canada.

A recent surge of evidence implicating myelin abnormalities in the etiology of
schizophrenia has been found. This study is a family-based genetic association
analysis examining the myelin-associated glycoprotein (MAG) and 2',3'-cyclic
nucleotide 3'-phosphodiesterase (CNP) genes in schizophrenia. About 246 families 
of primarily European-Caucasian origin were genotyped for MAG rs2301600,
rs720308, rs720309, rs756796, and CNP rs2070106 single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs). The FBAT program (v1.7.2) and Transmit were used to analyze individual
SNPs and haplotypes, respectively. The CNP SNP (rs2070106) was potentially
associated with schizophrenia (P=0.027). MAG variants were not associated with
disease transmission based on single marker or haplotype analysis. A significant 
maternal parent-of-origin effect for the CNP risk allele for schizophrenia was
found (P=0.003). No CNP-MAG gene-gene interaction conferred increased risk for
schizophrenia. Our finding provides support for potential association of the CNP 
gene but not the MAG gene in schizophrenia in a Caucasian population.

PMID: 18496213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2008 Mar 5;147B(2):233-77. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.b.30711.

The XVth World Congress of Psychiatric Genetics, October 7-11, 2007: Rapporteur
summaries of oral presentations.

Alkelai A(1), Baum A, Carless M, Crowley J, Dasbanerjee T, Dempster E, Docherty
S, Hare E, Galsworthy MJ, Grover D, Glubb D, Karlsson R, Mill J, Sen S, Quinones 
MP, Vallender EJ, Verma R, Vijayan NN, Villafuerte S, Voineskos AN, Volk H, Yu L,
Zimmermann P, Delisi LE.

Author information: 
(1)Biological Psychiatry Laboratory, Dept. of Psychiatry, Hadassah - Hebrew
University Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel. alkelai.ana@gmail.com

The World Congress of Psychiatric Genetics (WCPG) has become an annual event
since the early 1990's sponsored by the International Society of Psychiatric
Genetics (ISPG). Each year the latest published and unpublished findings are
aired for discussion by representatives of the majority of research programs on
this topic world-wide. The 2007 congress was held in New York City and attracted 
over 1000 researchers. The topics emphasized included results from whole genome
association studies, the significance of copy number variation and the important 
contributions of epigenetic events to psychiatric disorders. There were over 20
oral sessions devoted to these and other topics of interest. Young investigator
recipients of travel awards served as rapporteurs to summarize sessions and these
summaries follow.

PMID: 18297693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Mol Psychiatry. 2007 Sep;12(9):794-5.

Meta-analysis of two dopamine D2 receptor gene polymorphisms with tardive
dyskinesia in schizophrenia patients.

Zai CC, De Luca V, Hwang RW, Voineskos A, Müller DJ, Remington G, Kennedy JL.

PMID: 17767146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2007 Sep;193(4):539-45. Epub 2007 May 12.

Serotonin transporter occupancy of high-dose selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors during major depressive disorder measured with [11C]DASB positron
emission tomography.

Voineskos AN(1), Wilson AA, Boovariwala A, Sagrati S, Houle S, Rusjan P, Sokolov 
S, Spencer EP, Ginovart N, Meyer JH.

Author information: 
(1)Clarke site, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Department of Psychiatry,
University of Toronto, ON, M5T 1R8, Canada.

RATIONALE: Previous work has shown 80% serotonin transporter (5-HTT) occupancy to
be a consistent finding at the minimum therapeutic dose during selective
serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) treatment.
[(11)C]N,N-dimethyl-2-(2-amino-4-cyanophenylthio) benzylamine positron emission
tomography ([(11)C]DASB PET) is currently the best method available to quantify
5-HTT occupancy in humans.
OBJECTIVES: The purpose of the present study is to determine 5-HTT occupancy
during high dose SSRI treatment using [(11)C]DASB PET.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Twelve healthy subjects and 12 subjects with major
depressive disorder completed the protocol. Depressed subjects received one
[(11)C]DASB PET scan after a minimum of 4 weeks treatment at high doses of
venlafaxine, sertraline, or citalopram. Baseline 5-HTT binding potential (BP) was
taken as the average 5-HTT BP of the 12 healthy subjects.
RESULTS: Mean striatal 5-HTT occupancy for each antidepressant group was
approximately 85% at high therapeutic dose. This was significantly greater than
80% (one-sample t test; p < 0.04, venlafaxine group; p < 0.02, sertraline group; 
p < 0.01, citalopram group) for each high dose antidepressant group.
CONCLUSIONS: Significantly greater 5-HTT blockade at high dose provides a
rationale for raising the dose from the minimum therapeutic dose in specific
clinical circumstances. It is likely that 15% unoccupied 5-HTT remains, which
should be addressed in future drug development.

PMID: 17497139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Cornea. 2004 May;23(4):372-6.

Combined topical and intracameral anesthesia in penetrating keratoplasty.

Segev F(1), Voineskos AN, Hui G, Law MS, Paul R, Chung F, Slomovic AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Toronto Western Hospital, University Health
Network, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

BACKGROUND: The standard of care for penetrating keratoplasty (PKP) is either
retrobulbar or peribulbar anesthesia combined with seventh cranial nerve akinesia
or general anesthesia. These methods are known to be associated with rare but
potentially serious adverse ocular and systemic events.
PURPOSE: To determine the safety and efficacy of combined topical and
intracameral anesthesia in addition to intravenous sedation for repeat
penetrating keratoplasty (PKP).
SETTING: Tertiary-care university hospital.
METHODS: In this prospective study, combined topical tetracaine 0.5% and 0.2 cc
intracameral 1% lidocaine along with i.v. sedation with midazolam and fentanyl
were used for patients undergoing repeat PKP in 15 eyes of 15 selected patients. 
The indication for surgery was failed corneal graft. Verbal pain scale (VPS, 0-3)
was recorded preoperatively, intraoperatively at 3 time-points (after
trephination, after placing 8 interrupted sutures, and after placing the running 
suture), and postoperatively (1 hour postoperatively, overnight pain, and 1 day
postoperatively). Patient and surgeon satisfaction were assessed postoperatively 
using a scale (1-5). After surgery patients were asked for their preferences
comparing the current use of topical anesthesia compared with retrobulbar
anesthesia used for their initial PKP.
RESULTS: The mean intraoperative VPS score was 0.51 +/- 0.32 (range 0-1.33), and 
the mean postoperative VPS score was 0.47 +/- 0.50 (range 0-1.67). There were no 
serious intraoperative or postoperative complications. All patients reported high
mean satisfaction score of 4.67 +/- 0.49 (range 4-5). The mean satisfaction score
reported by the surgeon was 4.47 +/- 0.63 (range 3-5). All patients but 1 (93.3%)
preferred combined topical over retrobulbar anesthesia, which they had in their
previous surgery.
CONCLUSIONS: We found combined topical and intracameral anesthesia to be safe and
effective in our selected group of patients undergoing repeat PKP, and it may
provide a satisfactory alternative anesthetic modality for patients in whom
general, retrobulbar, or peribulbar anesthesia may be contraindicated.

PMID: 15097132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]
